tallest of all animals.
Giraffes inhabit dry, tree-scattered terrain south of the Sahara.
The male averages 5.3 m (17 ft) in height, and with its 40-cm (15-in) tongue is able to reach high into acacia trees, the leaves of which are one of its main foods.
The giraffe, like most mammals, has only seven neck vertebrae, which are greatly elongated to support its extremely long and muscular neck.
Due to the great distance between the animal's heart and head, its vascular system is equipped with valves so that sufficient blood reaches the brain.
The giraffe has keen senses of smell and hearing, and exceptional eyesight.
The long, flexible tongue and long, muscular upper lip are used to rip leaves from branches.
Both sexes have two or four short, blunt, skin-covered horns.
The coat has chestnut brown blotches against a buff background, markings that blend with the dappled shadows of tree branches.
As a giraffe ages, its color grows a darker brown.
Each animal has a unique set of markings.
A giraffe's life span is up to 26 years in the wild and up to 36 years in captivity.
A giraffe gallops with the hind feet reaching in front of the fore feet and the neck swinging widely, giving the appearance of slow motion, although it can reach 56 km/h (35 mph).
When walking it paces, moving the two feet of one side forward simultaneously.
A giraffe's great weight, which averages 800 kg (1800 lb), makes it unable to traverse boggy swamps or riverbeds.
On dry, hard land, however, it ranges widely and sometimes is found hundreds of kilometers from water.
Unlike many grass-eating herbivores of Africa, giraffes do not migrate during dry seasons because they get their food and most of their moisture from leaves.
A giraffe can go for more than a month without drinking, and the few times it does drink, the animal must spread the long forelegs widely to reach the water.
This awkward posture is why a giraffe rarely grazes grass.
When a giraffe vocalizes, it emits moans or low notes.
A giraffe usually sleeps in standing position.
Its protection against predators, of which lions are chief, is kicking with the large, heavy hooves.
Giraffes congregate in loosely organized herds of two to ten members, with individuals often joining and leaving again.
Each herd is led by an adult bull and consists of cows, calves, and sexually immature males.
During mating season males vie for females by butting each other with their heavy necks and heads.
After about 15 months a cow bears a single calf, 1.7 to 2 m (5.6 to 6 ft) high, which can stand 20 minutes after birth.
Calves come to sexual maturity in about four years.
Once heavily hunted for their thick, leathery skins, giraffes are now protected.
The giraffe is related to the okapi, or forest giraffe, which is found in the inaccessible rain forests of northeastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC, formerly Zaire) and western Uganda.
Unlike the giraffe, the okapi has a short, stout body and stands only 150 to 170 cm (5 to 5.5 feet) high at the shoulders.
The okapi remains so secluded that it was not discovered until 1900.
Scientific classification: The giraffe belongs to the family Giraffidae.
It is classified as Giraffa camelopardalis.
The okapi also belongs to the family Giraffidae, and is classified as Okapia johnstoni.
word used by biologists in two different senses, both of which imply the accommodation of a living organism to its environment.
One form of adaptation, called physiological adaptation, involves the acclimatization of an individual organism to a sudden change in environment.
The other kind of adaptation, discussed here, occurs during the slow course of evolution and hence is called evolutionary adaptation.
Evolutionary adaptations are the result of the competition among individuals of a particular species over many generations in response to an ever-changing environment, including other animals and plants.
Certain traits are culled by natural selection (see Evolution), favoring those individual organisms that produce the most offspring.
This is such a broad concept that, theoretically, all the features of any animal or plant could be considered adaptive.
For example, the leaves, trunk, and roots of a tree all arose by selection and help the individual tree in its competition for space, soil, and sunlight.
Biologists have been accused of assuming adaptiveness for all such features of a species, but few cases have actually been demonstrated.
Indeed, biologists find it difficult to be certain whether any particular structure of an organism arose by selection and hence can be called adaptive or whether it arose by chance and is selectively neutral.
The best example of an evolutionary development with evidence for adaptation is mimicry.
Biologists can show experimentally that some organisms escape predators by trying to be inconspicuous and blend into their environment and that other organisms imitate the coloration of species distasteful to predators.
These tested cases are only a handful, however, and many supposed cases of adaptation are simply assumed.
On the contrary, it is possible that some features of an organism may be retained because they are adaptive for special, limited reasons, even though they may be maladaptive on the whole.
The large antlers of an elk or moose, for example, may be effective in sexual selection for mating but could well be maladaptive at all other times of the year.
In addition, a species feature that now has one adaptive significance may have been produced as an adaptation to quite different circumstances.
For example, lungs probably evolved in adaptation to life in water that sometimes ran low on oxygen.
Fish with lungs were then "preadapted" in a way that accidentally allowed their descendants to become terrestrial.
Because the environment exerts such control over the adaptations that arise by natural selection - including the coadaptations of different species evolving together, such as flowers and pollinators - the kind of organism that would fill a particular environmental niche ought to be predictable in general terms.
An example of this process of adaptative radiation, or filling out of environmental niches by the development of new species, is provided by Australia.
When Australia became a separate continent some 60 million years ago, only monotremes and marsupials lived there, with no competition from the placental mammals that were emerging on other continents.
Although only two living monotremes are found in Australia today, the marsupials have filled most of the niches open to terrestrial mammals on that continent.
Because Australian habitats resemble those in other parts of the world, marsupial equivalents can be found to the major placental herbivores, carnivores, and even rodents and moles.
This pattern can be observed on a restricted scale as well.
In some sparsely populated islands, for example, one species of bird might enter the region, find little or no competition, and evolve rapidly into a number of species adapted to the available niches.
A well-known instance of such adaptive radiation was discovered by Charles Darwin in the Galápagos Islands.
He presumed, probably correctly, that one species of finch colonized the islands thousands of years ago and gave rise to the 14 species of finchlike birds that exist there now.
Thus, one finch behaves like a warbler, another like a woodpecker, and so on.
The greatest differences in their appearance lie in the shapes of the bills, adapted to the types of food each species eats.
When different species are compared, some adaptive features can be described as analogous or homologous.
For example, flight requires certain rigid aeronautical principles of design; yet birds, bats, and insects have all conquered the air.
In this case the flight structures are said to be analogous - that is, they have different embryological origins but perform the same function.
By contrast, structures that arise from the same structures in the embryo but are used in entirely different kinds of functions, such as the forelimb of a rat and the wing of a bat, are said to be homologous.
or Protective Coloration, in animals, concealment by blending in with the surroundings.
Patterns of color on skin, shell, or feathers serve as protection from predators.
striped mammal native to Africa, smaller in size than the related horse and greatly resembling the wild ass in habit and form, having a short, erect mane, large ears, and a tufted tail.
The stripes, which distinguish this animal from other members of the horse family, serve as protective coloration in its natural habitat.
The chief enemies of the zebra are lions and hunters who kill zebras for their flesh and hide.
Zebras can be trained to work in harness and are popular animals in zoos and circuses.
Three species and several subspecies are generally recognized, chiefly according to variations in the arrangement of the stripes.
The mountain zebra is the smallest species, averaging about 1.2 m (about 4 ft) high at the shoulders, and has a strong, muscular, and symmetrical body.
It is silver-white, striped with black markings that extend to every part of the body except the stomach and the inner part of the thighs.
The markings on the head are brown, and the muzzle is a rich bay-tan.
The legs are short and wiry.
Mountain zebras travel in small herds and inhabit the mountain ranges of South Africa.
This species was formerly plentiful but has been decimated by intensive hunting.
Burchell's zebras travel in large herds and inhabit the central and eastern plains; the species is named after the British naturalist William John Burchell.
They are pale yellow with broad, black stripes, generally interspersed with fainter markings called shadow stripes.
The species has several variations; some have stripes down to the hooves, and the lower legs of others are solid white without any stripes.
The Boers refer to all varieties of Burchell's zebra as quaggas.
The true quaggas, however, were exterminated during the 19th century; they were darker in color than the zebra and striped only on the head, neck, and shoulders.
The largest species, Grévy's zebra, is named after the former French President Jules Grévy.
It attains a height of about 1.5 m (about 5 ft) at the shoulders, and its stripes are narrow and numerous.
Formerly plentiful and of wide range, this species now inhabits the arid plains of eastern Africa and is nearly extinct.
Scientific classification: Zebras belong to the family Equidae.
The mountain zebra is classified as Equus zebra, Burchell's zebra as Equus burchelli, the true quagga as Equus quagga, and Grévy's zebra as Equus grevyi.
