common name applied to a group of egg-laying mammals, including the platypus, or duckbill, and the echidnas, or spiny anteaters.
Monotremes are native to Australia, Tasmania, and New Guinea.
They possess true teeth only during the early stages of embryonic development.
After monotreme eggs are hatched, the young are helpless, and, in the case of the echidna, are carried in shallow abdominal pouches.
Young monotremes do not have mouth parts suitable for suckling; the liquid produced by the nippleless mammary organ is licked from the belly hair of the mother.
The adult male platypus has a fighting spur on each ankle, which secretes a poisonous substance.
Scientific classification: Monotremes belong to the subclass Monotremata.
The platypus makes up the family Ornithorynchidae.
It is classified as Ornithor hynchus.
Echidnas are classified in the genera Tachyglossus and  Zaglossus of the family Tachyglossidae.
in biology, the process by which environmental effects lead to varying degrees of reproductive success among individuals of a population of organisms with different hereditary characters, or traits.
The characters that inhibit reproductive success decrease in frequency from generation to generation.
The resulting increase in the proportion of reproductively successful individuals usually enhances the adaptation of the population to its environment.
Natural selection thus tends to promote adaptation by maintaining favorable adaptations in a constant environment (stabilizing selection) or improving adaptation in a direction appropriate to environmental changes (directional selection).
Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace first proposed this concept in 1858.
process whereby all living organisms produce offspring.
Reproduction is one of the essential functions of plants, animals, and single celled organisms, as necessary for the preservation of the species as eating is for the preservation of the individual.
In almost all animal organisms, reproduction occurs during or after the period of maximum growth.
In plants, which continue to grow throughout their lifetime, the relationship between growth and reproduction is more complex.
Individual plants have growth limitations imposed by inherited characteristics and environmental conditions; if the plant grows excessively, any of a number of reproductive processes may be stimulated (see Plant Propagation).
Environmental conditions also play some part in the reproduction of higher animals, but hormonal elements are more important.
Most single-celled organisms reproduce by a process known as fission, in which the parent organism splits into two or more so-called daughter organisms, thereby losing its original identity.
Cell division, which results in the multiplication of cells constituting the tissues, organs, and systems of a multicellular organism, is not considered true reproduction; it is almost identical, however, with the binary fission of single-celled organisms.
In certain multicellular animals, such as the coelenterates, sponges, and tunicates, cell division often results in the production of buds that arise from the body of the parent and then later separate to develop into a new organism identical with the parent; this process, known as gemmation, is analogous to the process of vegetative reproduction or propagation in plants.
Reproductive processes such as those cited above, in which only one parent gives rise to the offspring, are scientifically classified as asexual reproduction.
The offspring produced are identical with the parent.
A number of single-celled organisms multiply by conjugation.
In this process, which is analogous to fertilization, two similar unicellular organisms fuse, exchange nuclear materials, and then break apart.
Each organism then reproduces by fission; occasionally, after conjugation, the participating organisms do not reproduce, the process in these instances seeming merely to revitalize the organisms.
Conjugation is the most primitive method of sexual reproduction by which organisms having genetic characteristics derived from two parents are produced.
Most multicellular animals and plants undergo a more complex form of sexual reproduction in which especially differentiated male and female reproductive cells (gametes) unite to form a single cell, known as a zygote, which later undergoes successive divisions to form a new organism.
The terms fecundation and fertilization are applied to the union of the male and female cells.
In this form of sexual reproduction, half the genes, the carriers of inheritable characteristics, in the zygote come from one parent and half from the other parent.
See Cell.
Many lower multicellular organisms and all higher plants undergo an alternation of generations.
In this process, a sexually produced generation alternates with an asexually produced generation.
In some organisms that reproduce sexually, a process known as parthenogenesis occurs in which the female sex cell develops without fertilization.
In higher animals, individuals of a single species are either male or female, according to whether they produce male reproductive cells or female reproductive cells.
The typical male reproductive cell, which is known as a sperm, spermatozoon, or spermatozoan, is a motile cell with a head containing the nucleus and a whiplike tail with which it swims.
The typical female reproductive cell, which is known as an egg or ovum, is a rounded cell many times larger than the sperm and containing large amounts of cytoplasm surrounding the nucleus.
Plant reproductive cells are roughly similar to animal cells, the male cell being known as the sperm or microgamete and the female cell as the ovum or macrogamete.
In some relatively simple animals such as the earthworms and leeches, organs producing sperm and ova occur in the same individual (see Hermaphroditism).
Although such animals produce both male and female gametes, the production of sperm and ova usually occurs at different times, so that these animals generally do not fertilize themselves but rather other individuals of the same species.
Certain hermaphroditic animals, such as the planarian flatworms, habitually undergo self-fertilization.
Among plants, one individual may bear reproductive organs of only one sex, separate reproductive organs of both sexes, or reproductive organs containing both male and female elements (see Flower).
Individuals among higher animals bear reproductive organs of only one sex.
This requires the bringing together of sperms and ova that are produced at a distance from each other.
In plants, wind and insects carry the sperm to the stationary egg, or, in a liquid medium, the sperm swims to the egg.
In lower animals, deposition of sperm and eggs in water is common.
This method is haphazard, as only a few of the many sperm discharged reach the eggs.
In higher animals, various adaptations have evolved by means of which the spermatozoa, contained in a liquid known as semen, are deposited in the lower segment of the female reproductive tract.
In vertebrates this internal deposition of semen occurs in the process of copulation, also known as coitus or sexual intercourse.
During copulation animals are locked in close embrace, and the male inserts the male genital organ, the penis, into the female genital orifice, the vagina, discharging the semen therein.
This process is known as insemination.
Both animal and human spermatozoa can be kept alive outside the body for long periods by freezing; artificially introduced into the female reproductive tract, such spermatozoa produce pregnancy.
The method, called artificial insemination, has been used in human reproduction to produce offspring where either the male or the female is sterile (see Infertility) and in animals for breeding purposes.
The union of male and female, necessary for internal fertilization, is encouraged in nature.
Most lower animals have definite seasons, governed by endocrine secretions (see Endocrine System; Hormone).
In most female mammals, estrus, or receptivity to mating, is operative only for short periods during the year.
Animals such as the cow have several such periods of estrus during the year, the dog one or two.
The human female normally has a 28-day reproductive, or menstrual, cycle, with ovulation usually occurring about 14 days before the onset of the menstruation, but sexual interest in humans is more culturally determined than tied to the reproductive cycle.
In most animals, copulation is preceded by a period of courtship; the courtship ritual is stereotyped to a large extent (see Animal Behavior).
In humans, courtship and mating practices have been strongly modified by social and religious codes of behavior set by society.
After fertilization of the egg, the resulting zygote undergoes cell division and differentiation to form the embryo.
In most higher plants, the embryo is enclosed in a layer of nutritive material surrounded by a hard outer covering, forming the seed.
In most lower animals the embryo, surrounded by the nutritive material of the former ovum, is enveloped by a leathery or calcareous shell and is extruded from the body of the female.
Animals, such as birds, that lay their eggs before the young are completely developed are termed oviparous.
Ovoviviparous animals are those that produce eggs in shells but that hatch the eggs within the body of the mother.
The placental mammals never produce shelled eggs; the embryo is implanted in the uterus and is nourished by the mother until almost completely developed.
Animals that give birth to live young without forming eggs are termed viviparous.
The period during which viviparous animals carry their young internally is known as the period of gestation.
In humans the period of years during which reproduction can occur begins with the onset of puberty, and the reproductive capacity of the female ends at what is known as menopause, or when menstruation ceases.
See Also Fertilization; Pregnancy and Childbirth; Reproductive System.
ovum or female reproductive body of multicellular animals, particularly the complex structure produced by birds, reptiles, and certain mammals that matures outside the body of the parent (see Embryology; Fertilization).
For a discussion of egg production as human food, Poultry Farming.
From the anatomical point of view, eggs consist of a minute speck of protoplasm, the germ, tread, or cicatricle, from which the animal develops, and a much larger amount of food material, the yolk.
In addition, all eggs have some form of protective coating, either a jelly mass, a shell, or a covering membrane.
The structure and development of eggs of different species vary with the condition under which the egg is produced and matures.
Animals that deposit their eggs to hatch outside the body are described as oviparous; those that produce eggs with soft coverings that mature within the body (and that therefore give birth to living young) are called viviparous; and those that produce hard- or tough-shelled eggs that mature within the parent's body are said to be ovoviviparous (although they give birth to living young, they are regarded as egg layers).
An egg that contains little yolk is either retained and nourished by the mother, or, if deposited outside the body, develops quickly into a self-sustaining form such as larva.
The number of eggs produced varies with the likelihood of their survival.
When conditions militate against the survival of eggs, as in the case of fish eggs, a large quantity of eggs is produced - as many as 14 million by the turbot.
The number of individuals that can develop from a single egg varies from one to several hundred in certain chalcid flies.
In one order of mammals, the monotreme, the eggs are deposited outside the body.
The platypus and the echidnas lay eggs with thin parchmentlike shells and a large yolk.
Besides the germ and yolk, the eggs of birds contain an albuminous mass, the white, which is an additional source of nourishment for the developing chick.
The egg is enclosed in a tough double membrane, the membrana putaminis, which in turn is covered by a hard, three-layered shell chiefly composed of calcium carbonate.
The shell protects the egg from the weight of the parents' bodies during incubation.
All birds, with the exception of the mound birds, incubate their eggs by body heat.
Some species of snakes bear their young alive.
Reptile eggs usually have leathery coverings that range in thickness from thin, parchmentlike layers to thick shells resembling those of birds' eggs.
All have a large amount of yolk.
The number of eggs laid varies from a dozen to as many as a hundred in the pythons.
Pythons, unlike the related boas, incubate their eggs.
Most reptilian species either bury their eggs in shallow ground, to be warmed by the sun, or lay them in underground burrows.
A few, such as the crocodile, incubate their eggs in beds of fermenting vegetable matter.
Some lizards lay almost mature eggs, and the young lizards break out of the soft shells as soon as the eggs are deposited.
In other lizards, the eggs may hatch in the oviduct of the parent.
The eggs of frogs and toads are spherical, are usually covered with a gelatinous substance, and are laid in long strings or in masses.
The eggs vary in size from a small dot, in the common toad, to the size of a pea, in a species of Malayan frog.
Most species deposit their eggs in water, sometimes attaching them to water plants; others lay the eggs in damp moss or attach them to the limbs or leaves of trees overhanging the water.
In several toads the eggs are carried on the back or legs of the female or male after the spawning.
Water-dwelling newts and salamanders commonly lay their eggs in water; land-living species usually deposit them in holes in moist ground, but a few bear live young.
Some fish in the elasmobranch group comprising sharks, rays, and skates lay eggs that resemble those of birds, containing a white as well as a yolk and covered with a horny shell.
The dogfish lays eggs that have tendrils and attaches them to objects underwater.
The hagfishes lay cylindrical eggs with hook-shaped processes at either end by which the eggs are linked together.
The eggs of the bony fishes are usually spherical and are surrounded by a tough capsule.
They may be deposited on the water bottom and covered with sand or gravel, as in salmon eggs, or laid in gelatinous masses that float.
The egg mass of the anglerfish covers an area of 5.6 to 8.4 sq m (60 to 90 sq ft).
Some species, such as the catfish, carry their eggs in their mouth until they hatch.
A few bear live young.
The eggs of mollusks, crustaceans, insects, and other invertebrate orders exhibit the widest variety in form.
Mollusk eggs vary from those of the squid, which are laid in a number of cylindrical cases attached to one another like the strands of a mop, to the eggs of certain snails of the genus Bulimus, which have hard shells and resemble pigeons' eggs in size and shape.
Most higher crustaceans carry their eggs attached to appendages on the underside of the body.
The water flea lays two kinds, small "summer eggs" carried in a pouch on the back, and larger "winter eggs" carried in a fold of the carapace until fertilized.
Normal reproduction takes place with the hatching of the summer eggs, but, in conditions of severe cold or the drying up of the pools in which the animals live, the winter eggs are fertilized and deposited.
They may then lie in a dormant state for years until conditions are favorable for hatching.
The eggs of insects are characterized by a great variety of egg and egg case forms as well as by the intricate markings on the eggshells of many species.
The eggs most eaten by humans are those of the domestic hen, but duck eggs and the eggs of other birds are also commonly used as food.
The eggs, or roe, of various fishes, especially sturgeon and salmon, are processed as a relish called caviar and considered a delicacy.
Reptile and insect eggs have also been a traditional food source.
common name applied to members of the vertebrate class Reptilia (see Animal), which include snakes, lizards, turtles, crocodilians, the tuatara, and numerous extinct fossil species.
Among the existing forms are about 2500 species of snakes, 2500 species of lizards, nearly 250 species of turtles, 22 species of crocodilians, and two species of tuataras.
They are distributed throughout the temperate and tropical regions of the world; being cold-blooded (dependent on the environment for warmth; see below), most reptiles cannot develop or live in polar regions, but several species have ranges extending north of the Arctic Circle.
Birds, their descendants, are conventionally placed in a separate class.
The majority of reptiles are primitively oviparous (egg laying), but many snakes and lizards are ovoviviparous or viviparous (giving birth to living young) (see Egg).
The eggs of reptiles have four specialized membranes: the amnion, the yolk sac, the allantois, and the chorion.
The amnion surrounds the embryo and contains the amniotic fluid.
As the embryo develops, the allantois grows out from the embryo's hind gut and helps the embryo respire.
The yolk-sac membrane covers the yolk, which is used as a food source for the growing embryo.
The chorion surrounds the embryo and the three other membranes.
In most snakes and some lizards, only one lung is functional; in other reptiles, both lungs are equally developed.
Being constrained by the temperature of their environment, reptiles hibernate in regions where the winter is cold, and some forms estivate - that is, become torporous - in exceptionally hot and dry regions.
Reptiles commonly are referred to as cold-blooded, which is actually misleading, because some reptiles when active maintain their bodies at a higher temperature than most mammals.
The important difference in temperature physiology is that most reptiles rely solely on external sources of heat, whereas birds and mammals use internal heat.
Reptiles regulate their body temperatures by taking advantage of different sources of outside warmth, such as direct sunlight, warm stones and logs, and the heated earth.
By using such heat sources to varying degrees, individual species of reptiles are able to regulate their body temperature.
Often this body temperature is well above the temperature of the surrounding air.
Only when the animal is inactive or dormant is the body temperature approximately the same as that of the environment.
The reptile skeleton is highly ossified.
The skull is joined to the vertebral column by a single condyle, or articular surface, as is true in birds.
Thoracic ribs are attached to the sternum in all reptiles except snakes.
Two complete pairs of limbs may be present, or they may be reduced or lost, as in snakes and some lizards.
The skin is covered with epidermal scales, and osteoderms (bony plates) may be embedded beneath the skin.
The reptilian heart usually consists of three chambers, including two atria and one ventricle.
In the crocodilians, however, the ventricle is almost completely divided into two chambers by a septum, or partition.
Both of the systemic aortic arches (certain arterial branches found in vertebrate embryos) persist in reptiles, in contradistinction to birds and mammals, in which only one develops.
Venous blood returns to the heart from the tail and hind limbs, through the kidneys, by a renal portal (vein-capillary) system; blood from the abdominal region returns by a portal system passing through the liver.
The urinary bladder is present only in turtles and most lizards.
The earliest reptiles appeared during the Upper Carboniferous period of the Paleozoic era.
Many forms evolved and flourished in the Mesozoic era, which is known as the Age of Reptiles.
Since then the great majority of reptilian species have become extinct; only 4 of the 23 orders of reptiles that have existed have living representatives.
The best-known orders are described below, beginning with the four living orders.
The order Squamata, the largest order of living reptiles, contains more than 5000 species of lizards and snakes (see Lizard; Snake).
The order Chelonia, or Testudines, was already differentiated from other reptiles in the Triassic period, and today it comprises the turtles and tortoises.
Species of this order are unique in having a carapace composed of various dermal bones that are fused to the trunk vertebrae and ribs.
Because the body walls are made rigid by the bony armor, inhalation occurs in these animals when certain muscles crossing the limb openings of the shell contract, thereby enlarging the internal cavity (see Turtles and Tortoises).
Crocodilians (the members of the order Crocodilia) first evolved in the late Triassic period and are the closest living relatives of dinosaurs and birds.
The crocodilian heart is almost completely divided into four chambers, and the brain and musculature are more developed than in other living reptiles (see Crocodile).
The order Rhynchocephalia contains the lizardlike reptiles known as beakheads, which are differentiated from the lizards by osteological characteristics.
Rhynchocephalians are well known from the Triassic and Jurassic periods, but all are now extinct except the New Zealand tuatara (see Tuatara).
The following six orders contain only extinct species.
Ichthyosauria comprised large marine reptiles that had fishlike bodies and paddlelike limbs.
Species of the typical genus, Ichthyosaurus, grew to lengths of more than 4 m (13 ft).
Sauropterygia included the long-necked aquatic reptiles that had paddle-shaped limbs adapted for moving through water.
This order also included the plesiosaurs, some of which reached about 15 m (about 50 ft) in length.
The dinosaurs belonged to the orders Saurischia and Ornithiscia, which included other reptiles found first in Triassic strata; they became common in later times until the close of the Mesozoic era, when all except the birds became extinct (see Dinosaur).
Pterosauria included flying reptiles related to dinosaurs (see Pterosaur).
The members of the order Therapsida were the advanced mammal-like reptiles - including the ancestor of mammals - that are known mostly from Middle Permian to Middle Triassic deposits.
common name applied to any warm-blooded animal belonging to the class that includes humans and all other animals that nourish their young with milk, that are covered with varying amounts of hair, and that possess a muscular diaphragm.
Mammals have the most highly developed nervous systems of all animals.
Most members of the group have four appendages, usually legs.
These may be adapted for use as swimming appendages, as in seals, or as wings, as in bats.
Some types, however, have two limbs that have been reduced to small vestiges beneath the skin, as in whales, or have been lost altogether, as in sea cows.
All mammals, except the egg-laying monotremes such as the platypus, produce live young that undergo the early stages of development within the body cavity of the mother (see Development).
Some mammals are helpless at birth; others are able to walk and even run immediately, and may be born fully furred and with their eyes and ears open.
The range in size of mammals is extraordinarily wide; the largest mammal, the blue whale, often exceeds 30 m (100 ft) in length, and the smallest shrews, mice, and bats are often less than 5 cm (less than 2 in) in length, excluding the tail.
The outer layer of the mammalian body, called the integument, consists of the skin and its derivatives.
The skin, equipped with varying amounts of hair, serves as a protective layer against mechanical injuries and invasion by germs, and prevents excessive loss or gain of body heat and moisture.
In many mammals the color of the skin or fur blends with the animal's natural surroundings.
In others there is great contrast with the natural surroundings to favor visual signals that provide information about the identity of a species, and about the gender, age, or social status of an individual.
The skin also functions as a sensory and excretory organ and contains specialized glands.
Mammary glands, which are present in fully developed form in all adult female mammals, and in undeveloped form in most male and young female mammals, secrete milk to nourish the young.
Sweat glands have been detected in almost all terrestrial mammals but appear to be lacking in some, notably the Cape mole rat and the two-toed sloth.
Aquatic mammals, such as whales, dolphins, and sea cows, have no sweat glands.
Sweat glands are usually located at the bases of hairs, except those in regions of skin bordering mucous membranes, such as the sweat glands surrounding the edges of the lips and covering the genitalia.
Many mammals, however, have few functional sweat glands; in dogs and cats, for example, only the glands on the soles of the feet are functional.
Meibomian glands, located on the edges of the eyelids, secrete an oily film that covers and protects the space between the eyeball and eyelid, and retains the film of tears that moistens the eyeball.
A secretion from the wax glands of the ear prevents the intrusion of dust particles and small insects into the inner ear.
Many mammals have scent glands located in the integument in various parts of the body; the fluids secreted by the glands repel enemies or attract the opposite sex.
The eyes, ears, and nose of mammals also have their external endings in the integument.
All mammals have two eyes, but the eyes of several burrow-dwelling mammals, such as moles, have lost their function partially or completely, or have become covered with skin.
The ears of terrestrial (land) and arboreal (tree-dwelling) mammals are visible superficially as projecting cartilage, but the external ears of aquatic mammals, such as seals and walruses, are reduced to little more than small protective flaps.
In whales' ears, the external openings are merely small holes.
The internal organs of mammals are essentially the same from the most primitive to the most complex.
The internal features that distinguish mammals from lower vertebrates are the presence of two to four optic lobes in the brain; a muscular diaphragm separating the heart and lungs from the abdominal cavity; a single arch in the main artery called the aortic arch, located on the left side of the body; the possession of a four-chambered heart, including two auricles and two ventricles; and the absence of nuclei in red blood corpuscles after birth.
All mammals except sea cows and certain sloths and anteaters have seven cervical (neck) vertebrae; this characteristic is possessed by the long-necked giraffe and the largest whales as well as by mice and other tiny mammals.
Other unique skeletal features common to mammals are the joint between the tibial and tarsal bones (the large bone in the lower leg and foot bones, respectively), the chain of small separate bones in the ear, and the joint of the mandible and squamosal bones of the skull.
All mammals reproduce sexually, and two types of reproductive acts are used to bring about sexual conjugation.
In the primitive egg-laying mammals, excretory and genital organs open into a common orifice, called the cloaca.
Transfer of sex cells from the male to the female is accomplished by bringing the cloacae together.
In all other mammals, however, the male sex cells are transmitted by copulation, or sexual intercourse.
After fertilization, development of offspring takes place entirely within the body of the mother in all mammals except the monotremes, which produce leathery-shelled eggs with large yolks, and many marsupials such as kangaroos and opossums, in which the gestation period only lasts about 10 to 15 days with most of the development taking place in the mother's pouch after birth.
Mammalian young are not prepared to pursue an independent existence immediately following birth but must be nursed during infancy.
See Reproduction.
Mammals probably appeared on the earth during the early Mesozoic era.
Most zoologists believe that mammals evolved from a group of extinct mammal-like reptiles, Theriodontia, which existed during the Triassic period.
The earliest animal fossils that have definitely been identified as mammals were found in rocks from the Jurassic period.
During the Jurassic period, five distinct orders of mammals existed.
One order was made up of small, rodent-like mammals, having gnawing front teeth and grinding teeth with several cusps, that became extinct in the Eocene epoch.
A second order consisted of small, carnivorous mammals, having molar teeth equipped with three simple, cone-like cusps, that became extinct before the end of the Eocene epoch.
A third group of small insect-eating mammals are the probable ancestors of present-day mammals.
Of the mammalian subclasses that still exist, the monotremes are unrepresented by fossil remains; the earliest marsupial and placental fossils were found in rocks of the Cretaceous period.
The marsupials were apparently unsuccessful in competition with the placentals (mammals with placentas, the organ surrounding a fetus within the uterus), and by the beginning of the Eocene epoch were restricted to the opossum family in North America, several families (now mostly extinct) in South America, and several families in Australia.
The earliest fossil remains of placentals discovered thus far have been found in western North America and western Europe; the placentals originated in the late Cretaceous period, and fossil records indicate that they spread rapidly throughout the Cenozoic era to form the dominant mammalian group all over the world except in Australia.
The insectivores, considered the oldest order of placental mammals, strongly resemble early fossil placentals.
Most mammals are land dwellers, living in such diverse habitats as the sparcely vegetated areas of deserts, tundras, and mountains, and the thickly vegetated areas of the tropics and temperate grasslands and forests.
Two placental orders and several genera of a third order are aquatic.
Monotremes are restricted to Australia, Tasmania, and New Guinea.
Marsupials are dominant in the same region as monotremes, but two groups of marsupials are native to the Americas.
Two orders of placental mammals, bats and rodents, are represented in the fauna of all continents except Antarctica.
In Australia the placentals are represented by a few species of rats, the wild dog (or dingo), and a few bats; the dingo probably was introduced by humans.
The primates, including gorillas, chimpanzees, and orangutans, are native to most tropical and subtropical regions except those of Australia.
Insectivores such as hedgehogs and shrews; rabbits, hares, and pikas; and even-toed ungulates such as cattle, camels, antelope, and deer, are native to all continents except Australia and Antarctica.
Odd-toed ungulates such as horses, zebras, and rhinoceroses are native to Eurasia, Africa, and South America.
Sloths, armadillos, tamandua, and anteaters are found only in the Americas.
The colugos (flying lemurs) are restricted to the Malay Peninsula, Indonesia, Borneo, and the Philippines.
Pangolins (scale-covered termite and ant eaters) are found in Africa and in Asia; aardvarks are exclusively African.
Two small orders, the elephants and hyraxes (small rock or bush dwellers distantly related to both elephants and tapirs), are represented only in Asia and Africa.
In 1996 the World Conservation Union (also known as ICUN) estimated that one-fourth of the world's mammal species are threatened with extinction (See Endangered Species).
The ICUN report, based on the first evaluation by the organization of all 4600 known species of mammals, also stated that 1096 mammals are at risk, including about one-third of the 275 primate species.
The primary threat to both mammals and other animals is fragmentation and degradation of natural habitats by human activity, and air and water pollution.
In addition, many mammals have been hunted until their populations are dangerously small.
While some are hunted for food, others are killed for their skins or furs and other body parts or because they interfere with human activity.
International treaties to prohibit the sale of threatened and endangered mammals or their body parts, national efforts such as those of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) under the Endangered Species Act, national parks and preserves, and land and water conservation programs represent major activities to protect endangered mammals as well as other animals and plants.
Scientific classification: Mammals are classified differently by many zoologists.
The class Mammalia, which is represented by about 4600 living species, is usually divided into three subclasses: the see Monotremata (Prototheria) or egg-laying mammals, the see Marsupialia (Metatheria) or marsupial mammals, and the Placentalia (Eutheria) or placental mammals.
The monotremes include the platypus and spiny anteaters of Australia.
The marsupials include the opossums of the Americas and many Australian mammals, such as the kangaroos and the koalas.
Pholidota, the pangolins; (9) Tubulidentata, the aardvark; (10) Rodentia, including squirrels, beavers, pocket gophers, pocket mice, rats, mice, mole rats, dormice, jerboas, porcupines, guinea pigs, and chinchillas; (11) Lagomorpha, including rabbits, hares, and pikas; (12) Sirenia, including the manatees and dugong; (13) Cetacea, the whales and dolphins; (14) Hyracoidea, the hyraxes; (15) Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates), including pigs, hippopotamuses, camels, llamas, chevrotains, deer, giraffes, the pronghorn, cattle, antelopes, goats, and sheep; (16) Perissodactyla (odd-toed ungulates), including horses, rhinoceroses, and tapirs; (17) Scandentia, the tree shrews; and (18) Proboscidea, the elephants.
