Lake Huron and Lake Michigan lie at the same elevation, 176 m (577 ft), separated by the Straits of Mackinac, where water flows from Lake Michigan to Lake Huron.
Huron is the larger of the two in area, at 59,600 sq km (23,000 sq mi); Michigan is deeper, 85 m (279 ft) on average, and contains more water.
Coal, limestone, petroleum products, and general cargo make up most of the rest of the cargo on the lakes.
About 10 to 20 percent of the freight shipped from Great Lakes' ports passes through the seaway to the Atlantic.
In the past the Great Lakes supported important commercial fisheries, with plentiful lake trout, sturgeon, whitefish, lake herring, pike, and walleye.
Most of the native fish populations in the lakes were severely depleted by the mid-1900s, and today there is little commercial fishing.
The lakes are an important recreational resource.
Thousands of summer and year-round homes line the shores of the lakes, and in summer millions of people flock to the lakes for powerboating, sailing, fishing, and swimming.
Water levels on the lakes vary over periods of several years by as much as 1 m (3 ft), and during storms lake levels may rise or fall as much as 2 m (7 ft), especially on Lake Erie, the shallowest of the Great Lakes.
Long-term variations in lake levels are caused primarily by variations in precipitation.
Meanwhile, other pollution-tolerant organisms thrive.
More recently, toxic contaminants, especially pesticides such as dichlorodiphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT) and industrial pollutants like polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), have drawn concern.
In many areas residents are warned to limit their consumption of fish caught in the lakes because toxic substances tend to accumulate within marine life.
Several agreements between the United States and Canada, including the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909 and the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreements of 1972 and 1978, have focused on water-quality problems in the Great Lakes.
The International Joint Commission on the Great Lakes, established under the Boundary Waters Treaty, implements and oversees these agreements and has limited authority to regulate obstructions or diversions of boundary waters that would affect the natural level or flow of lake waters.
The fish populations of the lakes have changed dramatically in the 20th century; changes were wrought at first by overfishing and then by the introduction of exotic species.
Most notable of the latter was the parasitic sea lamprey, which probably entered the lakes via the Erie Canal and spread following the completion of the new Welland Canal in 1932.
The sea lamprey virtually eliminated lake trout from Lakes Huron and Michigan.
Canadian and American government programs, instituted in the 1970s, have reduced the number of lampreys.
The decline in the lake-trout population allowed another invader, the alewife, to flourish, unconstrained by any natural predators.
Alewives entered the lakes through the Saint Lawrence Seaway and the Welland Canal.
Alewife populations have been brought under control by the coho salmon, imported into the lakes in the 1970s, which has become the dominant predator and an important sport fish.
In 1986, a small mollusk known as a zebra mussel was introduced from Europe, probably carried by a ship.
The zebra mussel population grew rapidly.
The mussels have coated pilings and clogged water intakes at power plants.
Zebra mussels filter the water, consuming algae and potentially displacing other algae-feeding organisms.
In removing algae from the water the mussels make the water much clearer.
However, they also make the water more acidic and increase the risk of exposure for humans and wildlife to PCBs and other pollutants.
As the mussels filter the lake water, they absorb the relatively low levels of toxic substances already in the water.
Then when the mussels are eaten by fish or birds, the toxic substances move along the food chain.
The Great Lakes were formed by erosion and deposition during the repeated glacial advances and retreats of the Pleistocene Epoch (the most recent of the Ice Ages), which ended about 10,000 years ago.
Before then, the area now occupied by Lake Superior was made of broad valleys and river systems, and the present region of the other lakes probably was a plain.
The lakes lie just southwest of the margins of the Canadian Shield, an area of resistant rocks that extends south to central Ontario and extreme northern Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.
During the Ice Age, glaciers eroded the weaker rocks at the margins of the shield and deposited some of this material to the south of the lakes.
Their travels opened up the fur trade, which exploited the lakes as a transport route to carry pelts by canoe from the interior to Atlantic ports.
As early as the 1620s the French exerted control to the western margins of Lake Superior, establishing a fort at Detroit and tapping fur resources from Québec, in the east, to western Ontario and Minnesota, in the west.
During the War of 1812 (1812-1815), naval battles between the United States and Great Britain took place on Lakes Ontario and Erie.
Since then lake-based commerce has developed peacefully.
The lakes were an important route for westward expansion of European settlement during the early 1800s.
The Welland Canal, joining Lakes Erie and Ontario, was opened in 1829 as a means to bypass Niagara Falls, and the first significant canals at Sault Sainte Marie were built in the 1850s.
By the late 1800s lake ports such as Chicago; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Detroit; Cleveland; Buffalo, New York; Toronto; and Hamilton were thriving industrial cities linking the interior of the continent with the Atlantic seaboard.
The Saint Lawrence Seaway strengthened this link by permitting oceangoing vessels to travel between the lakes and the Atlantic.
contamination of water by foreign matter such as microorganisms, chemicals, industrial or other wastes, or sewage.
Such matter deteriorates the quality of the water and renders it unfit for its intended uses.
Exotic organic chemicals, including pesticides, various industrial products, surface-active substances in detergents, and the decomposition products of other organic compounds.
Radioactive substances from the wastes of uranium and thorium mining and refining, from nuclear power plants, and from the industrial, medical, and scientific use of radioactive materials.
Heat may also be considered a pollutant when increased temperatures in bodies of water result from the discharge of cooling water by factories and power plants.
Notable effects of water pollution include those involved in human health.
Nitrates in drinking water can cause a disease in infants that sometimes results in death.
Cadmium in sludge-derived fertilizer can be absorbed by crops; if ingested in sufficient amounts, the metal can cause an acute diarrheal disorder and liver and kidney damage.
The hazardous nature of inorganic substances such as mercury, arsenic, and lead has long been known or strongly suspected.
Lakes are especially vulnerable to pollution.
Control can take place at the point of generation within the plant; wastewater can be pretreated for discharge to municipal treatment systems; or wastewater can be treated completely at the plant and either reused or discharged directly into receiving waters.
Agriculture, including commercial livestock and poultry farming, is the source of many organic and inorganic pollutants in surface waters and groundwater.
These contaminants include both sediment from the erosion of cropland and compounds of phosphorus and nitrogen that partly originate in animal wastes and commercial fertilizers.
Animal wastes are high in oxygen-demanding material, nitrogen, and phosphorus, and they often harbor pathogenic organisms.
Wastes from commercial feeders are contained and disposed of on land; their main threat to natural waters, therefore, is via runoff and leaching.
Control may involve settling basins for liquids, limited biological treatment in aerobic or anaerobic lagoons, and a variety of other methods.
Wastes that are discharged directly into U.S. marine waters are estimated conservatively to exceed 45 million metric tons per year.
About 80 percent of this amount is waste produced by dredging, 10 percent is industrial waste, and 9 percent is sewage sludge.
The presence of toxic substances, the rapid uptake of contaminants by marine organisms, heavy deposits of materials on the bottom environment near the shore, and excessive growth of undesirable organisms - the combination of all these aspects has very serious consequences.
These large-scale accidental discharges of liquid petroleum products are an important cause of pollution along shore lines.
The most spectacular involve the supertankers used for oil transport, but many other ships also spill oil, and offshore drilling operations contribute a large share of the pollution.
One estimate is that of every million tons of oil shipped, one ton is spilled.
Some of the largest spills thus far recorded involve the tanker Amoco Cadiz off the French coast in 1978 (1.6 million barrels of crude oil) and the Ixtoc I oil well in the Gulf of Mexico in 1979 (3.3 million barrels).
The largest spill in the U.S. (260,000 barrels) was that of the tanker Exxon Valdez in Prince William Sound, Gulf of Alaska, in March 1989.
Within a week, under high winds, this spill had become a 6700-sq-km (2600-sq-mi) slick that endangered wildlife and fisheries in the entire gulf area.
The oil spills in the Persian Gulf in 1983, during the Iran-Iraq conflict, and in 1991, during the Persian Gulf War, resulted in enormous damage to the entire area, especially to the marine life.
The primary legislative basis for managing water pollution is the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1956, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1965, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972, and the Clean Water Act of 1977.
In addition, ocean dumping is controlled by the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act of 1972.
The 1972 amendments established stringent controls and cleanup deadlines for industrial and municipal pollution, shifting the emphasis from the regulation of general water quality to the setting of rigorous standards for wastewater in particular.
The American chemist Harold Clayton Urey discovered in 1932 the presence in water of a small amount (1 part in 6000) of so-called heavy water, or deuterium oxide (D2O); deuterium is the hydrogen isotope with an atomic weight of 2.
In 1951 the American chemist Aristid Grosse discovered that naturally occurring water contains also minute traces of tritium oxide (T2O); tritium is the hydrogen isotope with an atomic weight of 3.
Water is the only substance that occurs at ordinary temperatures in all three states of matter, that is, as a solid, a liquid, and a gas.
In this state, it is called bound water and has different characteristics from free water See Soil; Soil Management.
Water also plays a key role in the metabolic breakdown of such essential molecules as proteins and carbohydrates.
This process, called hydrolysis, goes on continually in living cells.
Hydrology is the science concerned with the distribution of water on the earth, its physical and chemical reactions with other naturally occurring substances, and its relation to life on earth; the continuous movement of water between the earth and the atmosphere is known as the hydrological cycle.
Under several influences, of which heat is predominant, water is evaporated from both water and land surfaces and is transpired from living cells.
This vapor circulates through the atmosphere and is precipitated in the form of rain or snow.
In aeration, or the saturation of water with air, water is brought into contact with air in such a manner as to produce maximum diffusion, usually by spraying water into the air in fountains.
Aeration removes odors and taste caused by decomposing organic matter, and also industrial wastes such as phenols and volatile gases such as chlorine.
It also converts dissolved iron and manganese compounds into insoluble hydrated oxides of the metals which may then be readily settled out.
Hardness of natural waters is caused largely by calcium and magnesium salts and to a small extent by iron, aluminum, and other metals.
Hardness resulting from the bicarbonates and carbonates of calcium and magnesium is called temporary hardness and can be removed by boiling, which also sterilizes the water.
The residual hardness is known as noncarbonate, or permanent, hardness.
Although developmental work on electrodialysis is continuing, a number of commercial plants are in operation.
In 1962 Buckeye, Arizona, became the first town to have all its water supplied by its own electrodialysis-desalting plant, which provides about 2,460,000 liters (about 650,000 gallons) of water daily at a cost of about $1 per 6300 liters (1670 gallons).
One major problem in desalinization projects is the cost of producing fresh water.
Using conventional fuels, plants with a capacity of 3.8 million liters (1 million gallons) per day or less produce water at a cost of $1 or more per 3800 liters (1000 gallons).
More than 500 such plants are in operation, with a total capacity of nearly 473 million liters (nearly 125 million gallons) a day; however, their high costs limit their use to areas of great water scarcity.
Water from conventional sources, such as wells and reservoirs, is sold for less than 30 cents per 3800 liters delivered to the home, and water for irrigation is usually priced at less than 5 cents per 3800 liters.
The dual-purpose atomic power and water-desalting plants now being planned are designed to produce fresh water for between 20 and 30 cents per 3800 liters.
Most experts expect more immediate results from efforts to purify mildly brackish water that contains between 1000 and 4500 parts per million of minerals, compared to 35,000 parts per million for ocean water.
Because water is potable if it contains fewer than 500 parts per million of salt, the cost of desalting brackish water is correspondingly less than it is for desalting seawater.
See Solar Energy;  See Also Waterpower; Water Supply and Waterworks.
Scientific classification: Green algae make up the phylum Chlorophyta.
The oldest green algae are classified in the genus Gunflintia.
warm current of the North Atlantic Ocean, flowing in a generally northeastern direction from the Straits of Florida to the Grand Banks, east and south of Newfoundland.
The term is often extended to include the North Atlantic Drift, which flows from the Grand Banks to the shores of western Europe, Scandinavia, and the islands of the Arctic Ocean.
The Gulf Stream is of great climatological importance because of its moderating effects on the climate of western Europe.
The sources of the Gulf Stream are the two equatorial currents: the North Equatorial Current, which flows west, roughly along the tropic of Cancer; and the South Equatorial Current, which flows from the coasts of southwestern Africa to South America and then north into the Caribbean.
The fusion of these two warm currents and a certain amount of water from the Gulf of Mexico forms the Gulf Stream.
In the straits that separate Florida from the Bahamas and Cuba, the Gulf Stream has a maximum width of about 80 km (about 50 mi) and a depth of about 640 m (about 2100 ft).
The surface temperature is about 25?C (about 77?F) and the surface current averages about 5 km/h (about 3 mph).
Farther north the stream gradually widens and is approximately 480 km (about 300 mi) wide off New York.
Between the stream and the northeastern coast of the United States lies an area of colder water, sometimes called the Cold Wall.
South of the Grand Banks, the stream meets and mixes with the cold Labrador Current, forming numerous whirlpools.
From this point the stream, or properly the North Atlantic Drift, moves northeast across the ocean, driven at a rate of less than 8 km (less than 5 mi) per day by the prevailing southwestern winds.
The drift then splits into several branches, of which the most important are the central flow, which reaches the coasts of Europe and then turns north; a northern tongue, the Irminger Current, which reaches the southern and western shores of Iceland; and a southern tongue, which first flows past the Azores and then past the Canary Islands.
All the way north from its source to the region of the Grand Banks, the Gulf Stream has special physical characteristics, including a markedly bright blue color and a high salinity.
After the Gulf Stream mixes with the Labrador Current, the characteristic color is lost, but the water of the North Atlantic Drift remains markedly salty.
the second largest of the earth's four oceans and the most heavily traveled.
It covers about twice the area of the Atlantic Ocean.
The Atlantic is divided into two nominal sections: The part north of the equator is called the North Atlantic; the part south of the equator, the South Atlantic.
The ocean's name is derived from Atlas, one of the Titans of Greek mythology.
The Atlantic Ocean is essentially an S-shaped north-south channel, extending from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the Antarctic continent in the south and situated between the eastern coast of the American continents and the western coasts of Europe and Africa.
Part of the midoceanic ridge system that girdles the world, it is a submarine ridge extending north to south in a sinuous path midway between the continents.
Roughly 1500 km (about 930 mi) wide, the ridge has a more rugged topography than any mountain range on land, and is a frequent site of volcanic eruptions and earthquakes.
The ridge ranges from about 1 to 3 km (about 0.6 to 2 mi) above the ocean bottom.
Along the American, Antarctic, African, and European coasts are the continental shelves - embankments of the debris washed from the continents.
Submarine ridges and rises extend roughly east-west between the continental shelves and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, dividing the eastern and western ocean floors into a series of basins, also known as abyssal plains.
The three basins on the American side of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge are more than 5000 m (more than 16,400 ft) deep: the North American Basin, the Brazil Basin, and the Argentina Basin.
The largest islands of the Atlantic Ocean lie on the continental shelves.
Newfoundland is the principal island on the North American shelf; the British Isles are the major island group of the Eurafrican shelf.
Other continental islands include the Falkland Islands, the only major group on the South American shelf, and the South Sandwich Islands on the Antarctic shelf.
A remarkable example of plant life is found in the Sargasso Sea, the oval section of the North Atlantic lying between the West Indies and the Azores and bounded on the west and north by the Gulf Stream.
Here extensive patches of brown gulfweed (Sargassum) are found on the relatively still surface waters.
Actively mined mineral resources in the Atlantic include titanium, zircon, and monazite (phosphates of the cerium metals), off the eastern coast of Florida, and tin and iron ore, off the equatorial coast of Africa.
The continental shelves and slopes of the Atlantic are potentially very rich in fossil fuels.
Large amounts of petroleum are already being extracted in the North Sea and in the Caribbean Sea-Gulf of Mexico region; lesser amounts are extracted off the coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea.
a group of structurally simple organisms that carry out oxygen-evolving photosynthesis.
Although most algae are microscopic - some as small as 1 to 2 micrometers in diameter (a micrometer is 0.000001 meter, or 0.00004 in) - many are conspicuous in the form of pond scum, seaweeds, red tide, blue-green discoloration of aquarium walls, and the green coating on trees.
Representatives of many genera of algae live together in symbiosis (mutually beneficial association) with fungi to form lichens.
In some forms of algae, the ability to photosynthesize has been lost through evolution.
Algae differ from bryophytes (mosses, liverworts, and hornworts), which also lack complex tissues, in that their reproductive cells are produced in unicellular structures rather than multicellular structures.
The study of algae is called phycology (Greek phykos, "seaweed") or algology (Latin alga, "sea wrack").
Macroscopic forms of algae are usually attached to a firm surface and grow abundantly as seaweeds in intertidal and subtidal zones as deep as 268 m (879 ft), the depth depending on light penetration.
Macroscopic algae also grow on rocks in flowing and standing freshwater, frequently becoming detached and floating as pond scum.
Microscopic forms of algae, which are mostly unicellular and planktonic (free-floating or motile - that is, capable of movement), are an essential part of the food chain in all aquatic habitats (see Plankton).
Scientists have classified algae in several ways.
Traditionally, nonmotile forms were studied as plants while motile forms, even if they perform photosynthesis, were considered bothplants and animals.
Some biologists now use a classification system that distributes algae among multiple kingdoms.
This encyclopedia classifies algae in the kingdom Protista, with the exception of the cyanobacteria or blue-green algae, which are classified in the kingdom Prokaryotae.
Current research suggests that at least 16 phyletic lines (groups of organisms with a common ancestry) of algae exist.
In taxonomy, phyletic lines determine an organism's phylum.
These include the cyanobacteria, red algae, brown algae, diatoms, and green algae.
Cyanobacteria, formerly known as blue-green algae, are similar to bacteria because they lack a nuclear membrane.
However, the fact that cyanobacteria carry out oxygen-evolving photosynthesis similar to higher plants supports their classification as algae, not bacteria.
Their color varies from blue-green to red or purple and is determined by the proportions of two special photosynthetic pigments, c-phycocyanin (blue) and c-phycoerythrin (red), which tend to mask the green chlorophyll.
While higher plants have two kinds of chlorophyll, called a and b, Cyanobacteria contain only chlorophyll a.
They reproduce by binary fission, production and germination of spores, or breakage of multicellular filaments.
Like bacteria, Cyanobacteria are nearly everywhere, occurring in typical aquatic and terrestrial habitats as well as in such extreme sites as hot springs (at temperatures up to 73?C, or 160?F) and crevices of desert rocks.
Fossils believed to represent Cyanobacteria are found in rocks 2.5 billion to 2.8 billion years old.
One genus, although common in all warm waters, is famous for floating in masses in the Sargasso Sea of the North Atlantic Ocean.
Alginate, a polysaccharide extracted from kelps, is used commercially in the same manner as agar and carrageenan.
Large brown algae are also sources of vitamins, minerals, and fertilizers.
Several species, including wakame, kombu, and hijiki, are important sources of food, especially in Japan.
Diatoms are unicellular organisms with pigmentation similar but not identical to that of brown algae.
They are found in all types of water and in moist soil.
Diatoms may float as plankton or attach to rocks or other surfaces.
Diatoms contribute significantly to the food chain in aquatic habitats.
Their cell walls are impregnated with silica and are fossilized as diatomaceous earth, which is used in filtration and as an abrasive.
Green algae are similar to plants in having both chlorophyll a and b and in storing food as starch.
Fossilized coccoliths, which form the white cliffs of Dover, England, are important in the geologic study of strata (layers of sedimentary rock).
The other algal phyletic lines with photosynthetic members are Chrysophyta, Xanthophyta (Tribophyta), Eustigmatophyta, Raphidophyta, Cryptophyta, Euglenophyta, and Prasinophyta.
common name for a freshwater bivalve mollusk first introduced to North America from Europe during the mid-1980s.
It has quickly spread and become a serious economic and environmental pest.
The zebra mussel gets its name from the characteristic striped pattern present on its shell.
It grows to a maximum of 50 mm (2 in) in length and lives four to five years.
Each mussel can filter as much as 1.5 liters (0.4 gallons) of water per day.
Dense populations can remove a large percentage of plankton from the water, thus reducing food for zooplankton (tiny animals that drift in the water), which in turn reduces available food for fish.
Zebra mussels also affect native clams and mussels by competing for space and food.
Nevertheless, zebra mussels make the water significantly clearer by filtering out algae that flourish in polluted waters.
As a result, threatened native aquatic plants like eel grass are receiving more sunlight and are once again growing in polluted areas.
Zebra mussels attach themselves in dense populations to various underwater objects.
The resulting thick coating or clogging is known as fouling.
Zebra mussels foul boat hulls, fishing equipment, buoys, and docks, causing extensive damage.
Fouling can also occur in intake pipes used for municipal water, fire control, and industry.
In addition to reducing water flow, clusters of mussels sometimes break away into valves and machinery, causing shutdowns and outages.
Current methods to control zebra mussel populations include removing them with steam, and by scraping, hydroblasting, poisoning, and electrocuting them.
The zebra mussel's ability to filter toxins from the water could make them useful in monitoring and even cleaning up polluted waters provided that the stored toxins are not reintroduced to the food web when the animal dies.
Scientific classification: The zebra mussel is a member of the family Dreissenoidea, in the mussel order Mytiloida, in the class Bivalvia, and is classified as Dreissena polymorpha.
collective term for a variety of marine and freshwater organisms that drift on or near the surface of the water.
Their movement depends largely on tides, currents, and winds, because they are too small or weak to swim against the currents.
That component of the plankton comprising bacteria and microscopic algae and fungi is called the phytoplankton.
Important algal groups in the phytoplankton include diatoms, golden algae, green algae, and cyanobacteria (formerly known as blue-green algae).
The other component of the plankton, the zooplankton, comprises protozoa and small crustaceans, jellyfish, worms, and mollusks, together with the eggs and larvae of the many animal species inhabiting marine and fresh waters.
Important protozoan groups in the zooplankton are dinoflagellates and foraminifera.
The density of plankton varies, depending on the availability of nutrients and the stability of the water.
A liter of lake water may contain more than 500 million planktonic organisms.
Marine plankton occasionally becomes so numerous that the organisms color the water; such sudden population increases are called tides.
The so-called red tides are caused by billions of dinoflagellates of various species; such tides are sometimes dangerous, because they can poison both humans and fish.
Red tides have occurred off the west coast of Florida and in the coastal waters of New England, southern California, Texas, Peru, eastern Australia, Chile, and Japan.
In 1946 such a tide killed fish, turtles, oysters, and other marine organisms in the Gulf of Mexico near Fort Myers, Florida.
The blue-green alga Trichodesmus sometimes, in dying off, imparts a reddish color to water; the Red Sea is so named because of this.
An estimated 90 percent of all photosynthesis and release of free oxygen takes place in the oceans.
Marine phytoplankton is the first link in the vast aquatic food chain.
Seaweeds differ from plants in that they lack the true stems, leaves, roots, and vascular systems of higher plants.
Instead, they anchor themselves to solid objects by holdfasts and absorb nutrients directly from the water, manufacturing their food by photosynthesis.
The pigments of red and brown algae mask the predominant green photosynthetic pigment, chlorophyll, and probably aid in photosynthetic metabolism  by absorbing and transferring light energy to the chlorophyll.
Seaweeds abound in shallow waters from the midtide line down to depths of 50 m (165 ft).
Along damp cold-water shores, they are able to withstand several hours of exposure to the sun, and they cover rocks high into the intertidal zone.
In the Tropics, seaweeds are confined to the zone between the low-tide line and a depth of about 200 m (about 660 ft); red algae predominate, especially in lagoons and around coral reefs.
Agar, also derived from red algae, is consumed as a delicacy in Asia and is used as a laboratory medium for culturing microorganisms.
Red algae are probably of little nutritive value to humans, however, other than for their limited protein, vitamin, and mineral (especially iodine) content.
Brown algae are used as fertilizer and as an ingredient for livestock meal.
