Native American group that formerly occupied a large territory in southeastern Washington, northeastern Oregon, and central Idaho.
The Nez Perc?are the most numerous group of related tribes that speak Sahaptian languages (see Native American languages).
The name Nez Perc?(French for "pierced nose") was mistakenly given to the tribe by French explorers.
The French encountered people in the region who wore nose pendants, but these people actually belonged to another tribe.
The Nez Perc?did not pierce their noses or wear ornaments.
The Nez Perc?followed an economy based on fishing, especially salmon, and on vegetable staples such as the bulbs of the camas plant, wild roots, and berries.
After about 1700 they also kept horses and hunted buffalo.
In winter they lived along riverbanks in villages of long houses built of bark, mats, and skins; in summer they camped in the mountains and in the great upland camas meadows.
They practiced some weaving and the decorating of buffalo skins with paint and porcupine quills.
Their principal religious ceremony was a dance in honor of the Guardian Spirit, their presiding deity.
War dances were also performed.
The entire tribe was divided into more than 40 bands, each led by a popularly selected chief.
Marriage was generally outside the band, or group.
In response to the tribe's request for instruction in Christianity, a Protestant mission was established at Lapwai, Idaho, in 1837.
In 1855 the Nez Perc?made a treaty with the United States, ceding the greater portion of their territory to the U.S. government and receiving a reservation that included the Wallowa Valley in Oregon.
When gold was discovered in the region, the tribe was forced to agree to surrender all its lands and to return to a reservation at Lapwai.
A band led by Chief Joseph refused to accept the agreement, and in 1877 he was victorious in a battle with federal troops.
Joseph then led his band, which included women and children, on a retreat of about 1600 km (about 1000 mi), and although pursued by federal troops that greatly outnumbered them, the Native Americans won several battles.
About 50 km (about 30 mi) from the safety of the Canadian border, however, Joseph and his band were captured.
They were sent to the Indian Territory of Oklahoma where many died.
Some of the survivors were later permitted to return to Idaho, where the majority of the tribe now lives on the Nez Perc?reservation.
Joseph and the remainder were sent to Colville reservation in northern Washington.
By 1990 only 4113 people claimed to be descendants of the tribe.
The Nez Perc?National Historical Park commemorates sites in Idaho, Montana, Oregon, and Washington associated with the group's culture and history.
Native American tribe of the Algonquian language family and of the Eastern Woodlands culture area.
The tribe originally lived in central and southern Wisconsin.
The name Kickapoo is derived from the Algonquian Kiwigapawa, meaning "he who moves about."
These Native Americans were extremely successful warriors who raided lands far from their villages; they also served as mercenaries for the French, Spanish, British, and Mexicans.
When not on raids the Kickapoo lived in permanent villages, subsisting by raising corn, beans, and squash and by hunting buffalo.
Their society was divided into bands based on patrilineal descent.
The Kickapoo strongly resisted European culture and religion and, to a large extent, retained their own ways.
In the period before the American Revolution, the Kickapoo moved southward into the Wabash region now included in the states of Illinois and Indiana, and during the Revolution and the War of 1812 they joined the other tribes of the Ohio Valley in siding with the British against the Americans.
In 1819, after ceding their lands in Illinois to the U.S. government, they settled in Missouri and later in Kansas.
About 1852 a large portion of the tribe made another migration southward through Texas into Mexico, where they became known as the Mexican Kickapoo.
Today Kickapoo communities are found in northern Coahuila State, Mexico, and in northeastern Kansas and Oklahoma.
In 1990, 3,577 persons in the United States identified themselves as Kickapoo, the majority living in Oklahoma, Texas, and Kansas.
See Also Native American Languages; Native Americans.
also known as the Salish Native American tribe originally inhabiting the region in the vicinity of Flathead Lake and Flathead River, in what is now northwestern Montana.
The name Flatheads was given to the Salish by other Native Americans tribes along the Columbia River to the west, who compressed the heads of their babies into a peak by means of a cone-shaped wicker headpiece.
By contrast, the heads of the Salish, which were normal in shape, had a flat appearance.
Although not warlike, the Salish defended themselves with great bravery against their enemies, the Blackfoot.
In 1885, after ceding their land by treaty to the United States, the Salish, Kootenai, and Upper Pend d'Oreille people were placed on reservations in northwestern Montana.
The name Flathead has been applied also to several tribes that actually practiced head-flattening: the Chinook of Oregon and Washington, and the Catawba, Choctaw, and Waxhaw of the southern United States.
Mongoloid people inhabiting small enclaves in the coastal areas of Greenland, Arctic North America (including Canada and Alaska), and extreme northeastern Siberia.
The name Inuit means the real people.
In 1977 the Inuit Circumpolar Conference, held in Barrow, Alaska, officially adopted Inuit as the replacement for the term "Eskimo."
There are several related linguistic groups of Inuit, including the Kalaallit in Greenland, the Inuvialuit in Canada, and the Inupiat, Yupiget, Yuplit, and Alutiit in Alaska.
Many of these groups prefer to be called by their specific "tribal" names rather than as Inuits.
In Alaska the term "Eskimo" is still commonly used.
The Inuit vary within about 5 cm (about 2 in) of an average height of 163 cm (5 ft 4 in), and they display metabolic, circulatory, and other adaptations to the Arctic climate.
Inhabiting an area spanning almost 5150 km (almost 3200 mi), Inuit have a wider geographical range than any other aboriginal people and are the most sparsely distributed people on earth.
Siberian Yuit.
From archaeological, linguistic, and physiological evidence, most scholars conclude that the Inuit migrated across the Bering Strait to Arctic North America.
A later arrival to the New World than most Native Americans, the Inuit share many cultural traits with Siberian Arctic peoples and with their own closest relatives, the Aleuts.
The oldest archaeological sites identifiable as Inuit, in southwest Alaska and the Aleutian Islands, date from about 2000  bc and are somewhat distinct from later Inuit sites.
By about 1800 bc the highly developed Old Whaling or Bering Sea culture and related cultures had emerged in Siberia and in the Bering Strait region.
In eastern Canada the Old Dorset culture flourished from about 1000 to 800 bc until about  ad 1000 to 1300.
The Dorset people were overrun by the Thule Inuit, who by ad 1000 to 1200 had reached Greenland.
There, Inuit culture was influenced by medieval Norse colonists and, after 1700, by Danish settlers.
The languages of the Inuit peoples constitute a subfamily of the Eskimo-Aleut language family.
A major linguistic division occurs in Alaska, according to whether the speakers call themselves Inuit (singular, Inuk) or Yuit (singular, Yuk).
The eastern branch of the subfamily - generally called Inupiaq in Alaska but also Inuktitut in Canada and Kalaallisut (Kalâdtlisut) in Greenland - stretches from eastern Alaska across Canada and through northern into southern Greenland.
It forms a dialect chain - that is, it consists of many dialects, each understandable to speakers of neighboring dialects, although not to speakers of geographically distant dialects.
The western branch, called Yupik, includes three distinct languages: Central Alaskan Yupik and Pacific Gulf Yupik in Alaska and Siberian Yupik in Alaska and Canada, each with several dialects (see Native American Languages).
The Inupiaq dialects have more than 40,000 speakers in Greenland and more than 20,000 in Alaska and Canada.
Yupik languages are spoken by about 17,000 people, including some 1000 in the former Soviet Union.
These various languages are used for the first year of school in some parts of Siberia, for religious instruction and education in schools under Inuit control in Alaska, and in schools and communications media in Canada and Greenland.
The Inupiaq and Yupik languages have an immense number of suffixes that are added to a smaller number of root words; these suffixes function similarly to verb endings, case endings, prepositional phrases, and even whole clauses in the English language.
A root word can thus give rise to many derivative words, often many syllables long and highly specialized in meaning, and sometimes complex enough to serve as an entire sentence.
Because these languages are among the most complex and difficult in the world, few explorers or traders learned them; instead, they relied on a jargon composed of Danish, Spanish, Hawaiian, and Inupiaq and Yupik words.
The Inupiaq and Yupik languages themselves have a rich oral literature, and a number of Greenland authors have written in Greenland Inupiaq.
The first book in Inupiaq was published in 1742.
The manners and customs of the Inuit, like their language, are remarkably uniform despite the widespread diffusion of the people.
The family - including the nuclear family, nearby relatives, and relations by marriage - is the most significant social unit.
In traditional culture, marriages, although sometimes arranged, are generally open to individual choice.
Monogamy is the usual pattern, but both polygyny and polyandry also occur.
Marriage, a virtual necessity for physical survival, is based on strict division of labor.Husband and wife retain their own tools, household goods, and other personal possessions; men build houses, hunt, and fish, and women cook, dress animal skins, and make clothing.
Food sources such as game and fish are considered community property.
The underlying social law is the obligation to help one's kin.
Community ridicule is the most common means of social control; in extreme cases, after lengthy deliberation, an offender may be socially ostracized or put to death.
With the absence of any communal legal structure, harming someone from another group jeopardizes one's own kinship group (which is held responsible for the offense) and raises the possibility of a blood feud.
Provocative displays of emotion are strongly disapproved.
Some groups control conflict by means of wrestling matches or song duels, in which the angry parties extemporize insulting songs; the loser might be driven from the community.
Alliances between non-relatives are formed and maintained through gift giving and the showing of respect.
The highest such form of gift giving occurs when a head of household offers the opportunity of a temporary sexual liaison with the most valued adult woman of his household.
The woman maintains the power to refuse the liaison, in which case respect will be symbolized through the presentation of a different gift.
The traditional Inuit diet consists mainly of fish, seals, whales, and related sea mammals, the flesh of which is eaten cooked, dried, or frozen.
The seal is their staple winter food and most valuable resource.
It provides them with dog food, clothing, and materials for making boats, tents, and harpoon lines, as well as fuel for both light and heat.
In the interior of Alaska and Canada, caribou are hunted in the summer.
To a lesser extent the polar bear, fox, hare, and Arctic birds, chiefly sea birds, also furnish important supplies.
Large game such as whale, walrus, and caribou require bigger hunting expeditions than are possible for one kinship group.
Many families follow a seasonal hunting and fishing cycle that takes them from one end to the other of their customary territory; trade with other groups often occurs along the way.
In the late 20th century many Inuit work for wages and buy commercially prepared food.
Igloos (Inuit  iglu, "house") are of two kinds: walrus or sealskin tents for summer and huts or houses for winter.
Winter houses are usually made of stone, with a driftwood or whalebone frame, chinked and covered with moss or sod.
The entrance is a long, narrow passage just high enough to admit a person crawling on hands and knees.
During long journeys some Canadian Inuit build winter houses of snow blocks piled in a dome shape.
Such snow houses, rare in Greenland and unknown in Alaska, were once permanent winter houses of the Inuit of central and eastern Canada.
In the 20th century many Inuit have moved into towns to live in government-built, Western housing.
The principal traditional means of conveyance are the kayak, the umiak, and the dogsled.
The light, seaworthy kayak is a canoelike hunting boat made of a wood frame completely covered with sealskin except for a round center opening, where the single occupant sits.
In Greenland and Alaska the skin around the hole can be laced tightly around the occupant, making the kayak virtually watertight.
The umiak, a larger, open boat about 9 m (about 30 ft) long and 2.4 m (8 ft) wide, and made of a wooden frame covered with walrus skins, is used for whaling expeditions and, sometimes, to transport families and goods.
The sled, drawn by a team of native dogs admirably adapted for the purpose (see Eskimo Dog), is common among all Inuit except those in southern Greenland.
When iron was obtained through trade, iron runners largely supplanted ivory and whalebone runners.
In the last half-century motorboats and snowmobiles have become important modes of travel.
Traditional Inuit dress for both men and women consists of watertight boots, double-layer trousers, and the parka, a tight-fitting double-layer pullover jacket with a hood, all made of skins and furs.
An enlarged hood forms a convenient cradle for nursing infants.
Traditional Inuit beliefs are a form of animism, according to which all objects and living beings have a spirit.
All phenomena occur through the agency of some spirit.
Intrinsically neither good nor bad, spirits can affect people's lives and, although not influenced by prayers, can be controlled by magical charms and talismans.
The person best equipped to control spirits is the shaman, but anyone with the appropriate charms or amulets can exercise such control.
Shamans are usually consulted to heal illnesses and resolve serious problems.
Communal and individual taboos are observed to avoid offending animal spirits, and animals killed for food must be handled with prescribed rituals.
Inuit rituals and myths reflect preoccupation with survival in a hostile environment.
Vague beliefs of an afterlife or reincarnation exist, but these receive little emphasis.
Most communal rites center on preparation for the hunt, and myths tend to deal with the relations that exist between humans, animals, and the environment.
In arctic Canada, Greenland, Labrador, and southern Alaska, large numbers of Inuit have converted to Christianity.
From prehistoric times Inuit tools have been noted for their careful construction and the artistry of their carved ornamentation.
Ivory from walruses and whales, the most accessible material for carving, is fashioned into figurines representing animals and people, and into decorated knobs, handles, and other tool parts.
Driftwood and whalebone are carved into ceremonial masks, some small enough to be worn on women's fingers during a ritual dance.
After contact with European, Canadian, and United States traders began in the 18th century, the Inuit also made, as trade items, scrimshaw-carved tusks and ivory and whalebone objects such as canes and cribbage boards.
After about 1950, the Canadian government, concerned with pressures that increasingly pushed the Inuit into a cash economy, encouraged the carving and sale of highly sophisticated soapstone sculptures.
Sculpture and printmaking, marketed through cooperatives, have become mainstays of the Canadian Inuit economy and the best-known aspect of Inuit culture.
Inuit performing arts center on ceremonial songs and dances.
Some magical songs are personal property and can be sold or traded.
The principal musical instrument is the shallow, tambourinelike shaman's drum.
In the late 20th century the Inuit have become more assertive, forming organizations to represent their interests, such as the Alaska Federation of Natives (1966).
The organizations have been instrumental in resolving land claims since 1971 (see Native Americans: Native Americans in Contemporary Society).
In Greenland the 1970s and 1980s were marked by a campaign for home rule from Denmark.
In December 1991 the Canadian government, yielding to ongoing Inuit pressure, agreed to the creation of a new unit known as Nunavut (Inuktitut for "our land") in eastern Northwest Territories.
Approved by referendum in May 1992, it will have an area of about 2 million sq km (about 772,500 sq mi).
The Inuit will have political control and broad economic rights over the territory.
The international Inuit Circumpolar Conference, founded in 1977, meets every three years.
It provides a forum for Greenland and North American Inuit to discuss common problems, lobby for an Inuit voice in the planning of economic development, and promote the preservation of the environment.
Native American pueblo (village) and part of the Acoma Reservation, in Cibola County, west central New Mexico.
The small population of Keresan-speaking Native Americans who inhabit the pueblo live in long, terraced dwellings made of stone and adobe atop a steep sandstone mesa 109 m (357 ft) high.
Founded about  ad 1075, the pueblo is considered the oldest continuously occupied settlement in the United States and is a National Historic Landmark.
Some cultivation and grazing are carried on in the plain below the mesa, but pottery is Acoma's major product.
The pueblo was discovered by the Spanish in 1540 and was conquered by them about 1599. Exhausted and embittered by decades of Spanish exploitation and forced religious conversion, the residents took part in the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, which kept the Spanish out of Pueblo lands for 12 years.
The community's name is derived from the Keresan word Akome, meaning "people of the white rock."
San Esteban Rey Mission, built in the early 17th century, is at Acoma.
Native American tribe belonging linguistically to the Iroquoian family and forming part of the Iroquois Confederacy.
The name by which the tribe is known is a corruption of a Native American word meaning "standing rock," referring to a boulder sacred to the tribe situated near the site of their ancient village on Lake Oneida, New York.
Their territory included the region surrounding the lake and later extended south to the Susquehanna River.
The tribe was friendly toward the French colonists and Jesuit missionaries, although most members of the confederacy were hostile to the outsiders.
During the American Revolution the Oneida sided with the colonists and were obliged to take refuge within the American settlements when their fellow tribes took the side of the British.
After the war most of the Oneida returned to Canada and settled in the region of the Thames River, Ontario, where their descendants still remain.
Between 1820 and 1835, most of the Oneida who had returned to their homes in New York State sold their land and moved to a reservation near Green Bay, Wisconsin.
The Oneida number about 3500.
words signifying special and tangible things, either living, as in the case of a person or an animal, or inanimate, as in the case of a place or a concept.
The study of names and their origins is called onomastics (Greek onoma, "name").
In all languages certain names are traditionally used to designate men and others are used for women; a number of English names, such as Evelyn or Leslie, can be used for either sex.
Names in themselves have no psychological significance, unless one associates a memorable experience with someone of a particular name.
Also, names that deviate from custom or that lend themselves to unattractive nicknames or diminutives may have an adverse effect on personality.
Given names, known among English-speaking people variously as first names, forenames, or Christian or baptismal names, existed before surnames.
Christian influence on first names has been especially strong.
In some countries, Brazil, for example, a child must be given an appropriate Christian name before he or she can be issued a birth certificate.
Modern names often are derived from sources such as the names of the months (June), precious stones (Ruby), popular contemporary personalities (Franklin Delano, Liza), flowers (Blossom), places (Georgia), or figures in classical legend (Diana, Jason).
New names are frequently coined from variant spellings (JoEtta, Beverleigh, Randi).
Before the development of last names, or surnames, one personal name was generally sufficient as an identifier.
Duplications, however, began to occur so often that additional differentiations became a necessity.
Thus, in England, for example, a person living near or at a place where apple trees grew might be called John where-the-apples-grow, hence, John Appleby.
Regional or habitation names, such as Wood or Woods, Moore, Church, or Hill, constitute the majority of English surnames.
Surnames reflecting medieval life and occupations also form an enormous group, Smith being the foremost with its equivalents in Spanish (Ferrer), German (Schmidt), or Hungarian (Kovacs).
Among other English last names denoting an occupation are Chapman (merchant or trader), Miller, and Baker.
Descendant surnames, or names indicating parentage, are often indicated by prefixes such as Mac-, Mc- in Scottish or Irish names or Ap- in Welsh names; or by suffixes such as -son in English names, -sen in Scandinavian names.
Thus occur the names Johnson or Jensen, "son of John," or Jakobsdottir, an Icelandic name meaning "daughter of Jacob."
In surnames can be detected a desire for immortality; succeeding generations tend to venerate the family name as a symbol of permanence.
The maternal grandfather's surname is often used as a child's first name, and women now often retain their maiden names after marriage, or hyphenate maiden and married names.
Compound names also occur in some countries where retaining both family names has long been the custom.
Thus, in Spain, Juan the son of Manuel Chávez and Juanita Fernández would be named Juan Chávez (y) Fernández.
The order of names differs from country to country.
In Western Europe and the United States, the tendency is to use a threefold pattern of given name, middle name, and surname or family name.
In Chinese names the first part is the surname, the second is the generation name, and the last is the given name.
In Hungary, the same order holds, with surname first and given name or names following.
Nicknames originate in various ways: in recognition of physical characteristics (Lefty); from verbal relationships (Franky changing to Cranky); or from an association of ideas (Dusty Rhodes).
Pseudonyms used by authors may conceal sex (George Sand - real name Amandine Aurore Lucie Dupin, Baronne Dudevant), or the past (O. Henry - real name William Sydney Porter), or may be used simply as a personal whim.
Such pseudonyms often become better known than the real name, as in the case of Mark Twain.
In the U.S., with the exception of the state of Pennsylvania, people may change their names freely as long as the request is reasonable and does not impinge on the rights of others.
To be legally safe, name changers should file an application with a court of record.
Some reasons for changing names are to resume a maiden name after divorce, to avoid spelling or pronunciation difficulties, to break with the past, or for business or stage purposes.
Many places throughout the world are named descriptively (Thunder Bay; Le Havre, French, "the harbor"); to signify ownership (Richardson Hill); in commemoration of a significant national figure (Lafayette, Galt); and, in Canada and the United States, after towns in Great Britain (Cambridge, London, New Glasgow) or the ancient world (Rome, Ithaca).
A rough estimate is that 3.5 million place-names exist in the U.S. alone, one for each square mile.
Many of these reflect Native American influence (Niagara, Potomac, Tennessee); others are Spanish (Florida, Santa Fe), French (Lake Champlain, Baton Rouge), Dutch (Brooklyn, Harlem), or Russian (Kotzebue, Tolstoi Point).
All nations have regulatory agencies that supervise and recommend geographical name changes.
In the U.S., the agency is the Board on Geographic Names of the Department of the Interior.
A United Nations committee actively attempts to standardize the forms of place-names throughout the world.
a closely related confederacy of Native American tribes of Algonquian linguistic stock, who roamed the northern Plains region between the upper Missouri and Saskatchewan rivers.
The confederacy is also called the Blackfoot Nation, and the tribes may individually identify themselves as Blackfeet.
The southern Piegan of Montana are officially known as the Blackfeet.
The Blackfoot consist of three distinct divisions: the Siksika, which in English means Blackfoot; the Kainah (Kainaiwa in the native language) or Blood; and the Piegan (Piikani in the native language).
The name Blackfoot is likely derived from the groups' tradition of using ashes to stain their moccasins.
Blood refers to the practice of dyeing faces and objects with red ochre.
Originally from Saskatchewan, in the mid-18th century they drifted into the Montana area in search of buffalo.
By the mid-19th century, at the peak of their power, they controlled a vast territory.
The Blackfoot were expert horseback riders, noted buffalo hunters, and fierce warriors.
They were feared by other Native American groups and were frequently at war with their neighbors, the Cree, Sioux, Crow, and other tribes.
In times of war the three divisions united to defend their lands.
The Blackfoot were a nomadic group, living in tepees in easily dismantled villages.
Blackfoot tribes were divided into several bands, each led by a chief.
The bands assembled in summer for social and religious ceremonies.
Except for growing tobacco, the Blackfoot did no farming; their culture and economy were thus essentially typical of those of the Plains tribes.
While the men made weapons and hunted, the women did household chores and gathered wild plants for food.
The Blackfoot practiced polygamy; a prosperous warrior might have several wives.
In 1990, 32,234 people identified themselves as members of the Blackfoot Nation.
Several thousand of these people, the southern Piegan, lived on the large Blackfeet Reservation in Montana.
Others lived on three reserves in Alberta, Canada: the Blood, Piegan, and Blackfoot Agencies.
See Also Native American Languages; Native Americans.
Native American tribe of Muskogean language family, and of the Southeastern culture area.
In the 18th century they were the dominant tribe in a confederacy with a membership at one time of about 30,000.
The confederacy occupied most of what are now the states of Alabama and Georgia and, after the Cherokee, was the most powerful grouping of Native Americans south of New York.
The Seminole of Florida were an offshoot of the Creek.
A number of other Muskogean tribes were absorbed by the Creek, who held black slaves and intermarried with them.
During the American Revolution the Creek supported the British.
They signed a peace treaty with the United States in 1790, but in 1813, instigated by the British, they again took up arms against the Americans, beginning with a terrible massacre at Fort Mims.
They were completely crushed by General Andrew Jackson in a brief but bloody campaign.
The Creek were then compelled to sue for peace, which was granted only on submission to a peremptory demand for the surrender of more than half their ancient territory.
Other cessions quickly followed, until 1828 when they sold all their remaining territory and agreed to move beyond the Mississippi River to Indian Territory, which later became Oklahoma.
A few remained behind.
In Oklahoma the Creek were one of the so-called Five Civilized Tribes because they established a system of government similar to that of the states.
The Creek were an agricultural tribe, living in villages consisting of log houses.
The houses were plastered on the outside with clay and arranged in a rectangle around a central space reserved for public ceremonies, among which the annual busk, or greencorn dance, was the main feature.
Their villages were often located at rivers and creeks - hence the name Creek given them by white traders.
Some villages were designated for war ceremonies, and others for peace ceremonies.
Creek temples were impressive dome-shaped structures, made of thatch, and situated on an earth elevation into which stairs were cut.
Creek women cultivated corn, squash, beans, and other crops, and the men hunted and fished.
Like many other tribes of the Southeast, the Creek were heavily tattooed and ornamented.
Those claiming Creek heritage numbered 43,550 in 1990.
See Also Native Americans.
