common name for a family of mostly herbaceous flowering plants, and for its representative genus.
The family contains more than 2000 species placed in about 80 genera.
The representative genus, with about 300 species of annual and perennial herbs, mostly natives of Europe and temperate Asia, contains the familiar carnation and sweet william.
Other members of the family include chickweed, soapwort, and catchfly or campion.
Members of the pink family occupy habitats ranging from salt marshes and beach areas to mesic forests.
The family is placed in an order that consists of 12 families and about 10,000 species.
The order is most common in moist areas of the temperate and tropical zones.
Many members, however, are adapted to alkaline areas (see goosefeet), or to dry areas (see cactus).
Botanically, the order varies considerably, but nearly all members have leaves that lack stipules (leaflike appendages at the base of the leafstalk).
Pinks also exhibit a distinctive form of growth in the stems and roots.
In most dicots, growth of tissue for conducting food and water is localized in specialized cells called cambial cells, which form a single, continuous ring near the surface of the stems and roots.
In most members of the pink order, however, this growth takes place in several layers of cambial cells at various depths within the roots and stems.
Flowers of the order have sepals (outer floral whorls).
What appear to be petals in many members of the order, such as carnations and four-o'clocks, are actually highly modified sepals, and what appear to be sepals are actually bracts (leaves borne on the floral axis).
The flowers have one to three whorls of stamens (male floral organs), and the styles of the pistil (female floral organ) are separate rather than united.
The pigments responsible for the red to blue and yellow to orange colors in the order are mostly betalains, namely betacyanins and betaxanthins, while, in most flowering plants, the pigments are flavonoids, namely, anthocyanins and anthoxanthins.
Scientific classification: Pinks make up the family Caryophyllaceae in the order Caryophyllales.
The family's representative genus is Dianthus.
In practicing selection, plant breeders choose plants with desirable traits for further propagation and discard plants that are inferior for that trait.
By doing so, plant breeders can select and reselect for the trait through successive generations, shifting the population in the desired direction.
Hybridization involves crossing plants of different strains or types to join in the progeny the desirable traits of both parents.
Undesirable traits also enter the combination, however, so hybridization is usually followed by several generations of selection.
This allows breeders to discard undesirable plants, choosing for further propagation only those plants with the desired combination of traits.
Backcrossing is a common variation on hybridization.
This technique is often used to transfer into a desirable variety a beneficial trait from an otherwise undesirable parent.
First the hybrid between the two parents is made; then the hybrid is crossed with the desirable parent.
The progeny from this backcrossing normally segregate widely, with individual plants showing a mixture of the characteristics of both parents.
By continued backcrossing and selection the plant breeder concentrates the qualities desired, and, if all goes well, in six or seven generations the variety once again breeds true but now exhibits its new trait.
Backcrossing is valuable for adding single gene characteristics to crop plants, particularly for resistance to specific insects and diseases.
When desirable characteristics are fully developed in a hybrid plant, and the plant can be propagated asexually by budding, grafting, or cloning, then no further selection is necessary.
A hybrid apple, for example, is propagated by grafting, so all resultant plants are identical.
Hybrids are often more vigorous than either parent.
This phenomenon is called hybrid vigor and has been widely used by plant breeders to increase crop yields.
Hybrid seeds have helped to double U.S. corn yields since the 1940s, and almost all the corn now grown in the United States and Europe is started annually from hybrid seed.
Hybrid breeding has expanded in recent years, and hybrid varieties are now common in grain crops (corn, sorghum), vegetables (cabbage, tomatoes, squash), and many flower species.
Occasionally an individual plant shows an important change in one or more traits arising from a spontaneous mutation.
Usually a change in a single gene is involved.
Most mutations are deleterious, but occasionally one has a distinct advantage.
The plant showing the mutation may be used directly as a variety, a common practice in apples and other fruits, or the new trait may be added to existing varieties through hybridization and backcrossing.
Plant mutations caused by single-gene changes have found wide use in ornamentals, resulting in double-flowered forms, weeping stems, dwarfism or unusual growth habits, and a wide diversity of color variations.
Mutations can be induced artificially by X rays or ultraviolet light.
Doubling the number of chromosomes is another plant-breeding technique that has been useful in improving some flower and crop plants, sometimes producing forms with increased vigor and with larger leaves, flowers, and fruits.
The chemical colchicine, an alkaloid extracted from the autumn crocus, is useful for this purpose.
Developments in plant tissue culture and genetic engineering are opening up new opportunities for plant breeders.
In tissue culture, a single laboratory dish of plant cells can be the equivalent of a field with thousands of plants from which to select improved strains.
As genetic engineering techniques are perfected, breeders may be able to transfer a gene for pest resistance to a crop plant directly from a wild relative or even from an unrelated species, thus reducing the need for pesticides over vast fields of crops.
Such attempts were meeting with only quite limited success by the late 1980s, however, and genetic modification through somoclonal variation techniques may prove more immediately useful.
See Also Plant Propagation.
in biology, any chemical molecule that reflects or transmits visible light, or both.
The color of a pigment depends on its selective absorption of certain wavelengths of light and its reflection of others.
For example, chlorophyll, the plant pigment, absorbs light in the violet and the orange to red portions of the light spectrum, converting this light energy to chemical energy (see Photosynthesis), and reflects light in the green and yellow portions of the spectrum.
Thus, chlorophyll appears green.
Chlorophyll and many other pigments act as catalysts, substances that accelerate or facilitate chemical reactions but are not used up in the reactions.
The carotenoids, a group of red, orange, and yellow pigments that occur widely in living organisms, also contain many catalytic members.
Some carotenoids, such as carotene, are involved in the synthesis of vitamin A, important in vision and growth, and others act as accessory pigments in photosynthesis, transferring the light energy that they absorb to chlorophyll for conversion to chemical energy.
They are synthesized by all green plants and by many fungi and bacteria and are acquired secondarily by animals through their food.
Apparently, some substances with important biological functions are only coincidentally pigments as well.
Thus, the oxygen-carrying molecules in the blood of higher animals also provide the blood's coloration.
Some of these pigments have taken on secondary functions.
Hemoglobin, for example, is also responsible for the brilliant red coloration, important in courtship, seen in the buttocks, genitals, and faces of baboons.
Other pigments, however, are important in providing concealing coloration in animals and plants.
The function of such coloration is to deceive possible predators or prey.
In some systems of coloration, the concealed organism mimics its background so closely that predators cannot distinguish it.
The pigmentation patterns of many tropical moths and butterflies, for example, so closely match the background patterns of the tree trunks on which they usually rest that they cannot be distinguished from the trees from only a few centimeters away.
Many insects also combine pigmentation with shape to facilitate concealment.
Thus, some tropical mantises blend perfectly with the orchid flowers on which they occur, both because their pigments match those of the orchids and because their bodies are generally shaped like parts of the flowers; other mantises are pigmented and shaped like leaves.
Pigments also protect organisms by providing coloration that matches that of an inedible or otherwise undesirable organism.
Viceroy butterflies, for example, are pigmented orange and black in patterns that resemble those of the undesirable monarch butterfly.
(Because the monarch butterfly feeds on milkweed plants and ingests alkaloids and cardiac glycosides, its ingestion has severe effects on vertebrates.)
See Adaptation; Mimicry.
Chemically, pigments fall into a number of large groups, but these are often arbitrarily divided into two major groups.
The first group comprises pigments that contain nitrogen; it includes hemoglobins, chlorophylls, bile pigments, and dark-colored pigments called melanin, widespread in many animal groups and the chemical that is responsible for variations in the color of human skin.
Related to melanins are the indigoids, of which the well known plant pigment indigo is an example.
Riboflavin, which is also known as vitamin B12 (see Vitamin), is one of a number of pale yellow to green pigments that are produced by several plant groups.
The second group is formed of pigments without nitrogen.
Carotenoids are members of this group, as are the important plant pigments called flavonoids.
In leaves, flavonoids selectively admit light wavelengths that are important to photosynthesis, while blocking out ultraviolet light, which is destructive to cell nuclei and proteins.
Flavonoids are also important in flower color, in particular providing red and blue pigments.
Bright fall colors are produced by the conversion of colorless flavonoids, called flavonols, into colored forms, called anthocyanins.
Quinones provide many yellow, red, and orange pigments, including several useful dyes derived from insects that feed on plants containing the quinones.
Cochineal, for example, is a red pigment obtained from the fat cells of scale insects that feed on cactus plants.
For discussions of natural and synthetic pigments and their uses in technology and art, see Dyeing; Dyestuffs; Oil Painting; Paint and Varnish; Pottery; Rugs and Carpets; Watercolor.
scientific study of how physical, biochemical, and behavioral traits are transmitted from parents to their offspring.
The word itself was coined in 1906 by the British biologist William Bateson.
Geneticists are able to determine the mechanisms of inheritance (see Heredity) because the offspring of sexually reproducing organisms do not exactly resemble their parents, and because some of the differences and similarities between parents and offspring recur from generation to generation in repeated patterns.
The investigation of these patterns has led to some of the most exciting discoveries in modern biology.
The science of genetics began in 1900, when several plant breeders independently discovered the work of the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel, which, although published in 1866, had been virtually ignored.
Working with garden peas, Mendel described the patterns of inheritance in terms of seven pairs of contrasting traits that appeared in different pea-plant varieties.
He observed that the traits were inherited as separate units, each of which was inherited independently of the others (see Mendel's Laws).
He suggested that each parent has pairs of units but contributes only one unit from each pair to its offspring.
Most cells in the human body contain 23 pairs of chromosomes, whereas most cells of the fruit fly Drosophila contain four pairs, and the bacteriumEscherichia coli has a single chromosome in the form of a ring.
Every chromosome in a cell is now known to contain many genes, and each gene is located at a particular site, or locus, on the chromosome.
The process of cell division by which a new cell comes to have an identical number of chromosomes as the parent cell is called mitosis (see Reproduction).
In mitotic division each chromosome divides into two equal parts, and the two parts travel to opposite ends of the cell.
After the cell divides, each of the two resulting cells has the same number of chromosomes and genes as the original cell.
Every cell formed in this process thus has the same array of genetic material.
Simple one-celled organisms and some multicellular forms reproduce by mitosis; it is also the process by which complex organisms achieve growth and replace worn-out tissue.
Higher organisms that reproduce sexually are formed from the union of two special sex cells known as gametes.
Gametes are produced by meiosis, the process by which germ cells divide.
It differs from mitosis in one important way: In meiosis a single chromosome from each pair of chromosomes is transmitted from the original cell to each of the new cells.
Thus each gamete contains half the number of chromosomes that are found in the other body cells.
Plants with red flowers have two copies of the allele R for red flower color and hence are homozygous RR.
Plants with white flowers have two copies of the allele r for white flower color and are homozygous rr.
Plants with one copy of each allele, heterozygous Rr, are pink - a blend of the colors produced by the two alleles.
The action of genes is seldom a simple matter of a single gene controlling a single trait.
Often one gene may control more than one trait, and one trait may depend on many genes.
For example, the action of at least two dominant genes is required to produce purple pigment in the purple-flowered sweet pea.
Sweet peas that are homozygous for either or both of the recessive alleles involved in the color traits produce white flowers.
Thus, the effects of a gene can depend on which other genes are present.
Traits that are expressed as variations in quantity or extent, such as weight, height, or degree of pigmentation, usually depend on many genes as well as on environmental influences.
Often the effects of different genes appear to be additive - that is, each gene seems to produce a small increment or decrement independent of the other genes.
The height of a plant, for example, might be determined by a series of four genes: A, B, C, and D. Suppose that the plant has an average height of 25 cm (10 in) when its genotype is aabbccdd, and that each replacement by a pair of dominant alleles increases the average height by approximately 10 cm (about 4 in).
In that case a plant that is AABBccdd will be 46 cm (18 in) tall, and one that is AABBCCDD will be 66 cm (26 in) tall.
In reality, the results are rarely as regular as this.
Different genes may make different contributions to the total measurement, and some genes may interact so that the contribution of one depends on the presence of another.
The inheritance of quantitative characteristics that depend on several genes is called polygenic inheritance.
A combination of genetic and environmental influences is known as multifactorial inheritence.
Mendel's principle that genes controlling different traits are inherited independently of one another turns out to be true only when the genes occur on different chromosomes.
The American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan and his coworkers, in an extensive series of experiments using fruit flies (which breed rapidly), showed that genes are arranged on the chromosomes in a linear fashion; and that when genes occur on the same chromosome, they are inherited as a single unit for as long as the chromosome itself remains intact.
Genes inherited in this way are said to be linked.
Morgan and his group also found, however, that such linkage is rarely complete.
Combinations of alleles characteristic of each parent can become reassorted among some of their offspring.
During meiosis, a pair of homologous chromosomes may exchange material in a process called recombination, or crossing-over.
(The effect of crossing-over can be seen under a microscope as an X-shaped joint between the two chromosomes.)
Crossovers occur more or less at random along the length of the chromosomes, so the frequency of recombination between two genes depends on their distance from each other on the chromosome.
If the genes are relatively far apart, recombinant gametes will be common; if they are relatively close, recombinant gametes will be rare.
In the offspring produced by the gametes, the crossovers show up as new combinations of visible traits.
The more crossovers that occur, the greater the percentage of offspring that show the new combinations.
Consequently, by arranging suitable breeding experiments, scientists can plot, or map, the relative positions of the genes along the chromosome.
In recent years geneticists have used organisms such as bacteria, molds, and viruses, which rapidly produce extremely large numbers of offspring, to detect recombinations that occur only rarely.
Thus, they are able to make maps of genes that are quite close together.
The method introduced at Morgan's laboratory has now become so exact that differences occurring within a single gene can be mapped.
These maps have shown that not only do the genes occur in linear fashion along the chromosome, but they themselves are linear structures.
The detection of rare recombinants can reveal the existence of structures even smaller than those observed through the most powerful microscopes.
Studies of fungi, and more recently of fruit flies, have shown that recombination of alleles can sometimes take place without reciprocal exchanges between chromosomes.
Apparently, when two different versions of the same gene occur together (in a heterozygote), one of them may be "corrected" to match the other.
Such corrections may take place in either direction (for example, the allele A may be changed to a, or vice versa).
A male is never heterozygous for the gene because he inherits only the gene that is on the X chromosome.
A male with H is normal; with h he has hemophilia.
When a normal man (H) and a woman who is heterozygous (Hh) have offspring, the female children are normal, but half of them carry the h gene - that is, none of them is hh, but half of them bear the genotype Hh.
The male children inherit only the H or the h; therefore, half the male children have hemophilia.
Thus, in normal circumstances a female carrier passes on the disease to half her sons, and she also passes on the recessive h gene to half her daughters, who in turn become carriers of hemophilia.
Many other conditions - including red-green color blindness, hereditary nearsightedness, night blindness, and ichthyosis (a skin disease) - have been identified as sex-linked traits in humans.
Two American geneticists, George Wells Beadle and Edward Lawrie Tatum, provided one of the first important clue s in the early 1940s.
Working with the fungi Neurospora and Penicillium, they found that genes direct the formation of enzymes through the units of which they are composed.
Each unit (a polypeptide) is produced by a specific gene.
This work launched studies into the chemical nature of the gene and helped to establish the field of molecular genetics.
That chromosomes were almost entirely composed of two kinds of chemical substances, protein and nucleic acids, had long been known.
Partly because of the close relationship established between genes and enzymes, which are proteins, protein at first seemed the fundamental substance that determined heredity.
In 1944, however, the Canadian bacteriologist Oswald Theodore Avery proved that deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) performed this role.
He extracted DNA from one strain of bacteria and introduced it into another strain.
The second strain not only acquired characteristics of the first but passed them on to subsequent generations.
By this time DNA was known to be made up of substances called nucleotides.
Each nucleotide consists of a phosphate, a sugar known as deoxyribose, and any one of four nitrogen-containing bases (see Acids and Bases).
The four nitrogen bases are adenine (A), thymine (T), guanine (G), and cytosine (C).
Every protein is made up of one or more components called polypeptides, and each polypeptide is a chain of subunits called amino acids.
Twenty different amino acids are commonly found in polypeptides.The number, type, and order of amino acids in a chain ultimately determine the structure and function of the protein of which the chain is a part.
Since proteins were shown to be products of genes, and each gene was shown to be composed of sections of DNA strands, scientists reasoned that a genetic code must exist by which the order of the four nucleotide bases in the DNA could direct the sequence of amino acids in the formation of polypeptides.
In other words, a process must exist by which the nucleotide bases transmit information that dictates protein synthesis.
This process would explain how the genes control the forms and functions of cells, tissues, and organisms.
Because only four different kinds of nucleotides occur in DNA, but 20 different kinds of amino acids occur in proteins, the genetic code could not be based on one nucleotide specifying one amino acid.
Combinations of two nucleotides could only specify 16 amino acids (42 = 16), so the code must be made up of combinations of three or more successive nucleotides.
The order of the triplets - or, as they came to be called, codons - could define the order of the amino acids in the polypeptide.
Ten years after Watson and Crick reported the DNA structure, the genetic code was worked out and proved biologically.
Its solution depended on a great deal of research involving another group of nucleic acids, the ribonucleic acids (RNA).
The specification of a polypeptide by the DNA was found to take place indirectly, through an intermediate molecule known as messenger RNA (mRNA).
Part of the DNA somehow uncoils from its chromosome packing, and the two strands become separated for a portion of their length.
One of them serves as a template upon which the mRNA is formed (with the aid of an enzyme called RNA polymerase).
The process is very similar to the formation of a complementary strand of DNA during the division of the double helix, except that RNA contains uracil (U) instead of thymine as one of its four nucleotide bases, and the uracil (which is similar to thymine) joins with the adenine in the formation of complementary pairs.
Thus, a sequence adenine-guanine-adenine-thymine-cytostine (AGATC) in the coding strand of the DNA produces a sequence uracil-cytosine-uracil-adenine-guanine (UCUAG) in the mRNA.
The production of a strand of mRNA by a particular sequence of DNA is called transcription.
Within the length of a sequence of nucleotides that codes a particular polypeptide may be one or more interruptions by noncoding sequences; within some genes as many as 50 or more of these intervening sequences, or introns, may be found.
During transcription the introns are copied into RNA along with the coding sequences, producing an extra-large RNA molecule.
The sequences corresponding to the introns are then exactly chopped out of the RNA, by special enzymes in the nucleus, to form the mRNA that is exported to the cytoplasm.
The functions (if any) of introns are not understood, although the suggestion has been made that the processing of RNA by chopping out the intervening sequences may be involved in regulating the quantity of polypeptide produced by the gene.
Introns have also been found in genes that code for special RNAs, such as those that are components of the ribosomes.
The discovery of introns was made possible by new methods of determining the exact sequence of nucleotides in molecules of DNA and RNA.
These methods were developed by the British molecular biologist Frederick Sanger; for this work he received a second Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1980.
Direct studies of DNA have also shown that, in higher organisms, some sequences of nucleotides are repeated many times throughout the genetic material.
Some of these repeated sequences represent multiple copies of genes that code polypeptides, or of genes that code special RNAs (almost always, there are many copies of genes that produce the RNA components of ribosomes).
Other repeated sequences do not seem to code polypeptides or RNAs.
Among them are sequences that seem able to jump from place to place in a chromosome, from one chromosome to another, and even from one species to another.
These transposons, or transposable elements - informally known as jumping genes - are able to attach to other DNA sequences, causing mutations in the genes adjacent to their points of arrival or departure.
Transposons were first discovered in the 1940s by Nobel laureate Barbara McClintock in her research on maize but have since been found in every species.
Much research is now focused on transposons, and many scientists suspect that these transposable elements may be a key to evolutionary change, helping to increase the genetic variation of a species.
Knowing how protein is made allows scientists to understand how genes can produce specific effects on the structures and functions of organisms.
This does not explain, however, how organisms can change in response to changing environmental circumstances, or how a single zygote can give rise to all the different tissues and organs that make up a human being.
Most of the cells in these tissues and organs contain identical sets of genes but nevertheless make different proteins; clearly, in the cells of any one tissue or organ some genes are acting but others are not.
Different tissues have different arrays of genes in the active state.
Thus, part of  the explanation for the development of a complex organism must lie in the ways by which genes are specifically activated.
The processes of gene activation in higher organisms are still obscure, but through the work of the French geneticists Fran\E7ois Jacob and Jacques Lucien Monod, a good deal is known about these processes in bacteria.
If the detached section unites with a different chromosome, or a different part of the original chromosome, it is called a translocation.
Sometimes a piece of chromosome will be lost from one member of a pair of homologous chromosomes and gained by the other member.
One of the pair is then said to have a deficiency and the other a duplication.
Deficiencies are usually lethal in the homozygous condition, and duplications are often so.
Inversions and translocations are more frequently viable, although they may be associated with mutations in genes near the points where the chromosomes have been broken.
Most of these chromosomal rearrangements are probably the consequences of errors in the process of crossing over.
Another kind of mutation occurs when a pair of homologous chromosomes fails to separate at meiosis.
This can produce gametes - and hence zygotes - with extra chromosomes and others with one or more chromosomes missing.
Individuals with an extra chromosome are known as trisomics, and those with a missing chromosome as monosomics.
Both conditions tend to result in severe disabilities.
For example, people with three copies of the 21st chromosome are born with Down syndrome.
Sometimes an entire set of chromosomes may fail to separate at meiosis; thus, a gamete with twice the normal number of chromosomes is produced.
If such a gamete fuses with one containing the normal number of chromosomes, the offspring will have three homologous sets rather than the normal two.
If two gametes with twice the normal number fuse, the offspring will have four homologous sets.
Organisms with additional sets of chromosomes are known as polyploids.
Polyploidy is the only known process by which new species may arise in a single generation.
Viable and fertile polyploids are found almost exclusively in hermaphroditic organisms (see Hermaphroditism), such as most flowering plants and some invertebrate animals.
Plant polyploids are usually larger and sturdier in form than their normal diploid ancestors.
Polyploid fetuses sometimes occur in humans, but they die at an early stage of fetal development and are aborted (see Genetic Disorders).
Population genetics, which investigates how genes spread through populations of organisms, was given a firm basis by the work of the English mathematician Godfrey H. Hardy and the German obstetrician Wilhelm Weinberg.
In 1908 they independently formulated what is now known as the Hardy-Weinberg rule.
This states that if two alleles of one autosomal gene (A and a) exist in a population, if their frequencies of occurrence (expressed in decimals) are p and q, respectively (p + q = 1), and if mating between individuals occurs at random with respect to the gene, then after one generation the frequencies of the three genotypes AA, Aa, and aa will be p2, 2pq, and q2, respectively.
These frequencies, in the absence of disturbances, will then remain constant from generation to generation.
Any change of frequency, which signals an evolutionary change, must therefore be due to disturbances.
These disturbances may include mutation, natural selection, migration, and breeding within small populations that may lose particular alleles by chance, or random genetic drift (see Evolution).
Evidence indicates that most populations are a great deal more variable genetically than was supposed.
Studies of the polypeptide products of genes have suggested that, on the average, about one-third of them have genetic variants at frequencies higher than could be expected from the balance between their generation by mutation and the selective disadvantage of the mutants.
This has led to increased interest in the ways by which alternate alleles may be actively maintained in a state of balance so that neither replaces the other.
One such balancing mechanism is heterozygous advantage, when the heterozygote survives better than either of the homozygotes.
Another balancing mechanism, called frequency-dependent selection, depends on the relative advantage of rare varieties, for example, in populations subject to predators.
Predators tend to concentrate on the variety that is common and to disregard rarer types.
Thus, a variety can be at an advantage when it is rare but may begin to lose the advantage as natural selection for the protective trait makes it more common.
Predators then begin to kill off the once-favored variety until at last an equilibrium is reached between the alleles in the population.
Parasites may act in a similar fashion, becoming specialized to attack whichever is the commonest variety of host and thereby maintaining genetic variability in host populations.
Most physical characteristics of humans are influenced by multiple genetic variables as well as by the environment.
Some characteristics, such as height, have a relatively large genetic component.
Others, such as body weight, have a relatively large environmental component.
Still other characteristics, such as the blood groups (see Blood Type) and the antigens involved in the rejection of transplanted organs (see Transplantation, Medical), appear to involve entirely genetic components; no environmental condition is known to change these characteristics.
The transplantation antigens have recently been extensively studied because of their medical interest.
The most important ones are produced by a group of linked genes known as the HLA complex.
This group of genes not only determines whether transplanted organs will be accepted or rejected, it is also involved in the body's resistance to various diseases (including allergies, diabetes, and arthritis).
Susceptibility to various other diseases has an important genetic element.
These diseases include Huntington's disease (see Chorea), Alzheimer's disease, diabetes mellitus, multiple sclerosis (MS), schizophrenia, malaria, several forms of cancer, migraine headaches, alcoholism, obesity, and high blood pressure.
Many rare diseases are caused by recessive genes and a few by dominant genes.
The identification and study of genes are of great interest to biologists, and are also of medical importance when a particular gene is involved in disease.
The human genome contains approximately 50,000 to 100,000 genes, of which about 4000 may be associated with disease.An invitation by the renowned German chemist Paul Ehrlich brought Karrer to the research institute Georg Speyer-Haus in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, first as a research assistant and later as researcher and director of the chemical research division.
Karrer studied the pigmentation of plants, including the blue and red colors of berries and flowers, known as anthocyanins.
In the process of splitting their very large molecules, or macromolecules, with enzymes, he was able to clearly describe their chemical structure.
He then began to study carotenoids, the orange-to-yellow pigments found in such foods as carrots and sweet potatoes.
By 1930, Karrer had described the structure of the carotene molecule (C40H56), which also demonstrated that the human body makes its own vitamin A from carotene.
It was a short step to studies of the chemical structure of vitamins themselves.
Within a year, Karrer had described the structure of vitamin A as similar to half of a carotene molecule (C20H30O).
His discovery that vitamin A was composed of atoms of hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen, just like other compounds, came as a revelation to scientists who had thought that vitamins were a different type of matter.
In the 1930s Karrer studied the B vitamins, with riboflavin being the first that he actually synthesized.
After successfully synthesizing other B vitamins, he studied vitamin E and vitamin K.
Later research took Karrer to a study of enzymes, particularly the coenzyme nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) which is involved with the energy system of cells.
Subsequently, he returned to his vitamin studies and synthesized all the carotenoids, about 40 different compounds.
Karrer also began research into poisons and he helped to determine the structure of curare, a resinous extract from certain South American trees used for poison arrows, as well as in drugs used to reduce muscle spasms and for general pain relief.
name applied to reproductive organs of certain plants (see Angiosperm), which produce fruits containing seeds (see Plant).
Not all seed plants have flowers; conifers, for example, produce seeds on scales united to form a cone.
Every flower is a terminal branch consisting of a modified stem, the floral axis, or receptacle.
The floral axis bears one to four types of specialized appendages, or modified leaves, usually arranged in whorls in the more advanced flowers and spirally arranged in the more primitive ones.
In a typical flower the outermost whorl, the calyx, consists of a number of sepals that protect the flower bud before it blooms.
The next whorl on the floral receptacle, the corolla, is composed of a number of petals, often bearing nectar-producing glands that aid in attracting pollinators (see Nectar; Pollination).
The next whorl, the androecium, consists of a number of stamens that produce in anthers the pollen necessary for reproduction.
The flower of the composite (a daisy, for example) is not a flower at all but a mass of many flowers called a head, or capitulum.
The petals of the daisy are not single petals; they are five fused petals and are part of an entire, small, bilaterally symmetrical flower that is inserted at the rim of the head.
The center of the daisy is composed of complete, perfect, radially symmetrical flowers - from a few to many - with five fused petals shaped to form a tube.
Two types of pigment are responsible for the coloration of flowers: fat-soluble pigments contained in chromoplasts and water-soluble pigments contained within the vacuoles of the epidermal cells of the petals.
Most blues and purples seen in flowers are due to vacuolar pigments known as anthocyanins.
These will change color depending on the degree of acidity or basicity, as well as on the type of anthocyanin pigment present - if the vacuolar solution is basic, they are blue; if neutral, purple or violet; and if acid, red.
Reds may also be due to the presence of chromoplast pigments.
Yellows are often due to the presence of flavones, as in the primrose.
The white appearance of petals is caused by numerous minute air pockets between the cells of the petals.
The fragrance of flowers is caused by minute quantities of volatile oils formed by the alteration of essential oils in petals.
Natural perfumes are made from such flowers as hyacinth, heliotrope, mimosa, jasmine, orange, rose, and violet, among others.
