alphabetical compilation of the words of a language, giving their meanings, spellings, etymology, pronunciation, and syllabication.
In a more general sense, the term dictionary is also applied to any alphabetically arranged compendium of special aspects of a language such as abbreviations, slang, or etymology, or in which the special terms of a subject are defined.
Thus, in recent times, dictionaries have been devoted to science, biography, geography, mathematics, history (see History and Historiography), and philosophy (see Philosophy, Western).
Among dictionaries defined as encyclopedic (see Encyclopedia), because they not only define words but also explain things, is the great French 19th-century dictionary-encyclopedia the Grand dictionnaire universel (17 volumes, 1865-1890), compiled by Pierre Athanase Larousse.
The greatest such American work is the Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia (revised edition, 12 volumes, 1911), edited by the American linguist William Dwight Whitney.
It defines general terms as well as biographical and geographical names.
The earliest known dictionaries were found in the library of the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal at Nineveh.
These clay tablets inscribed in columns of cuneiform writing date from the 7th century bc and remain the key to knowledge of Mesopotamian culture (see Mesopotamia).
Later dictionaries, most written after the 5th century ad, include Sanskrit dictionaries of botany, medicine, and astronomy (see Sanskrit Language), and polyglot lexicons in Sanskrit, Tibetan, Mongolian, and Chinese.
The first attempt to gather the entire Arabic vocabulary into one work was probably made by Khalil ibn Ahmad of Oman, who adopted an arrangement based on certain phonetic and philological principles.
Originating from, and stimulated by, the study of Arabic, the compilation of Hebrew dictionaries began about the 10th century (although some scholars place the beginnings of Hebrew lexicography between the 6th and 8th centuries).
The Greeks and Romans did not conceive of a work containing all the words of their own or any foreign language; their early dictionaries were merely glossaries of unusual words or phrases.
The first Greek lexicon, a collection of terms used by Homer, was compiled by the philosopher Apollonius during the 1st century bc.
One of the earliest works in Latin lexicography, by Verrius Flaccus, is De Verborum Significatu (The Meaning of Words, compiled during the 1st century ad).
This work, in which the words are arranged alphabetically, has furnished a great deal of information on antiquities and grammar.
The earliest polyglot dictionary (1502) was the work of the Italian monk Ambrogio Calepino.
Originally compiled as a Latin-Greek lexicon, it was extended to include Italian, French, and Spanish; the 1590 Basel edition included 11 languages.
The 2-volume Dictionnaire de l'Académie-Française (8th edition, 1931-1935) is an important dictionary of literary French.
Works containing more recent vocabulary are the Dictionnaire de la langue française (7 volumes, 1956-1958), a reprint of the work of the scholar Maximilien Paul Émile Littr? and the Grand Larousse de la langue française (7 volumes, 1971-1978).
The standard modern Italian dictionary is the Grande dizionario della lingua italiana (1961- ), and that of the Spanish language is Diccionario de la lengua española (19th edition, 1970).
The great standard wordbook for German is the Deutsches Wörterbuch (16 volumes, 1854-1960; revised edition begun 1965), commenced by the philologists Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm (see Grimm Brothers).
Two Russian dictionaries are indispensable for that language: the 4-volume Slovar' russkogo iazyka (1957-1961) for current, more popular usage, and the 17-volume Slovar' sovremennogo russkogo literaturnogo iazyka (1950-1965) for the more literary language.
Beyond these scholarly works, compiled on historical principles, are the numerous bilingual dictionaries, which are of varying degrees of reliability.
They are designed for the person learning a language and are thus generally limited to word equivalents, not derivations or pronunciation.
The Promptorium Parvulorum Sive Clericorum (Storehouse for Children or Clerics) was compiled in 1440 by the Dominican monk Galfridus Grammaticus, also known as Geoffrey the Grammarian, in Norfolk, England.
It was printed in 1449 by Wynkyn de Worde and may be regarded as the first English dictionary.
It consisted of Latin equivalents of 10,000 English words and remained a leading wordbook for several generations.
It was followed by the Bibliotheca (1538) of Sir Thomas Elyot, another English-Latin dictionary.
Robert Cawdry, in A Table Alphabeticall . . . of Hard Usuall Wordes (1604), produced the first dictionary giving definitions in English of English words.
The word dictionary was first used by Henry Cockeram in The English Dictionarie (1623).
In 1656 Thomas Blount issued his Glossographia, also entirely in English with ". . . hard words together with Divinity Terms, Law, Physick, Mathematicks and other Arts and Sciences explicated."
These early works characteristically confined themselves to "hard words" and phrases not generally understood, because the daily vocabulary of the language was not expected to require elucidation.
The New English Dictionary (1702) by John Kersey was a departure from the hard-word tradition; it included ordinary English words as well as unfamiliar terms.
Another early attempt at a comprehensive inventory of the English language was the Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) by Nathan Bailey, reissued in 1730 as the Dictionarium Brittanicum: A More Compleat Universal Etymological Dictionary Than Any Extant.
This work used quotations from established literary works to confirm and supplement definitions.
The 2-volume lexicon A Dictionary of the English Language (1755), by the lexicographer, essayist, and literary critic Samuel Johnson, further extended the use of quotations.
Johnson's dictionary remained the model of English lexicography for more than a century.
Dictionaries with guides to pronunciation were compiled by the British publisher David Buchanan.
The actor Thomas Sheridan later compiled a General Dictionary of the English Language (1780) with the object of establishing a permanent standard of pronunciation.
The most influential of the dictionaries concerned with pronunciation was the Critical Pronouncing Dictionary and Expositor of the English Language (1791) by another actor, John Walker.
The most comprehensive lexicographic work in the English language, A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles (NED), popularly known as The Oxford English Dictionary (OED), was begun under the auspices of the English Philological Society in 1857.
The Scottish lexicographer Sir James Augustus Henry Murray became editor in 1879; the first 10 volumes were published between 1884 and 1928, and the last 3 volumes were added in 1933.
A 4-volume supplement was issued between 1972 and 1986.
A 20-volume second edition was published in 1989.
The Compact Edition of the Oxford English Dictionary, a 2-volume micrographically reduced version of the 13-volume set, was published in 1971.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, a 2-volume abridgement with some revisions in pronunciation, was issued in 1933.
It was revised twice, and a reset edition was published in 1973.
In 1987 The Oxford English Dictionary on CD-ROM was published (see CD-ROM).
The second edition of the CD-ROM version was issued in 1992.
The Scottish lexicographer Sir William A. Craigie, who had collaborated on the editing of the first edition of the OED, began a companion work in 1936: A Dictionary of American English on Historical Principles was completed in 4 volumes in 1944.
The first historically important contribution to American lexicography was the volume A New and Accurate Standard of Pronunciation (1783), popularly known as Webster's Spelling Book.
This work was issued by the educator and lexicographer Noah Webster as the first part of his Grammatical Institute of the English Language (1783-1785).
Although not a true dictionary, the Spelling Book, because of its American origin and emphasis and its simplification of English, became a household reference wordbook throughout the United States.
Its success led Webster to compile his first American lexicon, A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language (1806).
His major contribution to lexicography, An American Dictionary of the English Language, begun in 1807 and published in 1828, included typically American usage as distinguished from the British idiom, as well as 12,000 more words and 40,000 more definitions than had ever appeared in any dictionary of the English language.
This work was never popular, however.
It was soon followed by the Comprehensive Pronouncing and Explanatory Dictionary of the English Language (1830) by the American lexicographer Joseph Emerson Worcester.
Worcester's dictionary, technically superior to Webster's, paved the way for modern collegiate dictionaries.
Webster brought out a revised edition of his dictionary in 1841.
The first Merriam-Webster dictionary, edited by Chauncey A. Goodrich, was published in 1847; in 1864 another edition with revised etymologies by a German philologist, edited by Noah Porter, continued the line of publications.
Webster's International Dictionary appeared in 1890; Webster's New International Dictionary appeared in 1909.
The second edition of Webster's New International Dictionary, referred to as Webster's Second, was published in 1934.
Meanwhile, Worcester published A Universal and Critical Dictionary of the English Language in 1846 and A Dictionary of the English Language in 1860, which included illustrations and synonyms.
In 1894 another line of dictionaries began with A Standard Dictionary of the English Language, edited by Isaac Kauffman Funk.
Funk introduced a new format for definitions, beginning with the current meaning for the word and ending with the older meanings in reverse historical order, followed by the etymology.
Previously, dictionaries had traced the historical uses of a word in chronological order; etymology was placed at the beginning of the definition.
Both formats are used in current dictionaries.
Listing the most accepted meaning first is recommended for children's dictionaries by teachers who feel that the child needs the reinforcement of recognition when attempting to master the use of a dictionary.
Funk & Wagnalls continued the Standard line with a revised edition called The New Standard Dictionary of the English Language in 1913 and the Funk & Wagnalls Standard Dictionary of the English Language (International Edition) in 1958.
Funk & Wagnalls Standard Desk Dictionary and Funk & Wagnalls Standard Collegiate Dictionary are editions designed for household and school use.
With the publication of Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language in 1961, American lexicographers increasingly attempted to reflect contemporary usage.
Many slang words and technical terms were included, and pronunciation schemes were adjusted to indicate regional speech patterns.
Newer comprehensive dictionaries along these lines include The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (3rd edition, 1992) and The Random House Dictionary of the English Language: 2nd Edition - Unabridged (1987).
Specialized dictionaries include the Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English (1937; 8th edition, 1985), originally edited by Eric Partridge, and the comprehensive Dictionary of American Regional English (Volume 1, 1985; Volume 2, 1991).
Revisions have continued to be made on most major dictionaries.
In addition, abridged versions of most of these are available and are also frequently revised.
Shorter dictionaries currently in use include Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (tenth edition), Webster's New World Dictionary of the English Language (third college edition), The Random House College Dictionary (revised edition), and the third college edition of The American Heritage Dictionary.
Children's dictionaries have been produced by several publishers; notable among them is the Thorndike-Barnhart series (now the Scott, Foresman series).
puzzle in which words, guessed from their definitions, are fitted into a diagram of white and black squares, the letters occupying the white squares to form an interlocking horizontal and vertical pattern.
The crossword has two sets of definitions, one for words to be written horizontally ( across clues) and the other for words to be written vertically (down clues).
The pattern of black squares usually serves to separate each word from adjacent words.
In a properly constructed crossword, as many white squares as possible should be part of both an across and a down word.
For this reason, some squares have associated across and down clues.
An early version of the crossword appeared in England in the 19th century.
It was designed for children and based on the word square of ancient times, in which a series of words is so arranged that their letters read alike horizontally and vertically.
The modern crossword, however, was developed in the United States.
The first puzzle appeared in the Sunday supplement to the New York World in December 1913.
During the next ten years the puzzle was established as a regular feature of the World.
The first book of crosswords was compiled by the World puzzle editors and published in 1924.
This started what was to become a worldwide craze.
Throughout the United States and Europe other Sunday editions and, later, many daily editions of newspapers began to publish the puzzles.
They appeared even in Asia, wherever the language lent itself to the interlocking process.
In early crossword puzzles only simple words and primary definitions were used.
Standards rose, however, and skilled constructors perfected the art of weaving more interesting combinations into diagrams having the fewest possible black squares.
The use of clues and the introduction of phrases, full names, titles, and the like into the patterns opened up new possibilities for more challenging crossword puzzles.
Special dictionaries have been compiled of unusual words that find their way into the puzzles.
The principal variation of crossword puzzles are thematic constructions based on current events or various other subjects; inner-clue combinations (such as the combination "catacombs," "Kitty Hawk," "pussy-foot," "Kit Carson" that suggest the word cat); and diagramless puzzles, in which only definitions are given, the pattern to be worked out by means of clues given in the numbering system.
Special constructions for use in schools serve as excellent vocabulary builders.
Canadians enjoy bilingual puzzles in which French definitions require horizontal words in English, and English definitions require vertical words in French.
The British added many black squares to avoid repetition of familiar short words, and devised ingenious clues, anagrams, and homophones.
One of the more challenging forms of crossword puzzle is the cryptic crossword, which utilizes clever and sometimes ambiguous word-play clues, rather than definitions, for word solutions.
Many popular word games, such as Scrabble, are derived from crossword puzzles.
Another notable form of word puzzle is the Double-Crostic, invented by Elizabeth S. Kingsley, which first appeared in 1934 in the Saturday Review.
The player must guess words defined in the puzzle and then write them into numbered squares in a diagram, which will form a quotation when the correct letters are supplied.
An added clue is provided by the acrostic formed by the first letters of the words to be guessed, which will spell out the name of the author and the title of the work from which the quotation is taken.
literature written by Jews in Hebrew and, by extension, certain theological and scholarly works translated from the Hebrew by Jewish scholars.
Hebrew was the principal literary language of the Jews until the 19th century, when European languages came into use for works of modern Jewish scholarship and Yiddish became a vehicle of literary expression.
For the writings of Jewish authors in Yiddish, see Yiddish Literature.
Since the establishment of Hebrew as the official language of Israel, in 1948, a large body of fiction and nonfiction has been written in the language.
Hebrew literature may be divided chronologically into 12 periods.
Ancient Hebrew literature consists mainly of the Old Testament, and the first three periods of the literature were devoted to the writing of various portions of the Old Testament.
In the first period, which extended from earliest times to about 950 bc, were written many of the lyrics found in the Old Testament.
To the second period (circa 950-586 bc) belong most of the historical narratives concerning the kings of Israel and Judah, some of the Psalms, and the oracles of certain prophets.
During the third period (586-165 bc) the books of the Bible known as the Writings, specifically, Ecclesiastes, Job, Proverbs, and a large part of the Psalms were composed.
Many apocryphal writings also originated during this time, and a major portion of the Old Testament was translated from Hebrew into Greek by Jewish scholars living in Egypt.
In the fourth period (165  bc-ad 135), the Midrash, which had been begun during the Babylonian Captivity, was divided into two parts, the Halakah and the Haggada.
Among other works of this period were a number of the apocalyptic writings of the Old Testament, including those pseudonymously ascribed to Moses, the prophet Daniel, the patriarch Enoch, and the priest and reformer Ezra; the Dead Sea Scrolls, attributed to Jewish monastic communities of the Essene type; and the writings of the philosopher Philo Judaeus and of the historian Flavius Josephus.
See Also Targum.
The major accomplishment during the fifth period (135-475) was the Talmud.
The version known as the Palestinian Talmud was completed, and the more important version known as the Babylonian Talmud took shape.
In the sixth period (470-740) the Babylonian Talmud was completed, some early versions of the Haggadoth (plural of Haggada) were collected, and marginal notes, called Masora, were added to the Scriptures.
In the seventh period (740-1040), the earliest Hebrew prayer books were compiled (circa 880), and the first dictionary of the Talmud was written (circa 900).
The era was also notable for Sefer ha-Mitzwot (The Book of Precepts), calling for a return to Scripture, written about 770 by Anan ben David, the founder of the Jewish sect of the Karaites.
Another important writer of the ninth period was Saadia ben Joseph, who compiled a Hebrew-Arabic dictionary and wrote poems in Hebrew.
Rhymed Hebrew poetry was first written in the 8th century, and the forms and rules of modern Hebrew poetry originated in the 10th century.
The great centers of Jewish scholarship in the early part of this period were northern Africa and Italy; in the latter part, Spain and Egypt.
The eighth period (1040-1204) was dominated by scholars and writers in Europe.
Spanish Jews, using either Arabic (mainly) or Hebrew, wrote poetry, philosophy, and history.
Among the most famous Jewish writers of Spain were the poet Judah ha-Levi and Maimonides, who contributed to law, logic, medicine, and mathematics, as well as to philosophy.
His treatise Guide for the Perplexed (c. 1190; trans. 1919) is one of the greatest products of Jewish religious philosophy.
Many renowned Talmudic scholars lived in France, others in Germany.
The ninth period (1204-1492) also included outstanding scholars in Spain, Portugal, Provence, Italy, and Germany.
Philosophical and ethical treatises began to be supplanted by mystical writings, foremost among which was the great 13th-century cabalistic work, the Zohar (in full, Sefer ha-zohar, or The Book of Splendor; see Cabala).
This has been ascribed to the Spanish scholar Moses de León.
The first Hebrew books ever printed were published in Italy; Joshua Soncino (flourished late 15th century), a member of a wide-ranging family of Italian-born Jewish printers, issued the first complete Hebrew Bible (1488).
Some 20 years later, the Dutch Christian printer Daniel Bomberg established a Hebrew press in Venice and published the first complete editions of the Palestinian and Babylonian Talmuds.
During the tenth period (1492-1755) numerous works in Hebrew, and in many European languages as well, were written by Jewish theologians, philosophers (for example, Baruch Spinoza), historians, mathematicians, poets, biblical commentators, and lexicographers.
The 11th period (1755-1880) is noted for the work of Moses Mendelssohn, whose efforts to acquaint the Jews of central Europe with Western culture initiated the movement known as the Haskalah (Enlightenment).
Decrying the use of Yiddish, Mendelssohn and his followers encouraged the revival of Hebrew as well as use of the languages of the countries in which Jews lived.
One of the first modern literary journals in Hebrew, Meassef (Collector), was published by Mendelssohn's circle.
Among other Hebrew scholars of this period was the Ukrainian-born philosopher Nachman Krochmal, whose major work was More Nevukhe ha-Zman (The Guide for the Perplexed of Our Time, 1851).
The 12th period (1880 to the present) is marked, initially, by the continuance of the Haskalah and a renaissance Hebrew literature on secular themes, and, latterly, by the Hebrew literature of Israel.
The rise of Zionism at the end of the 19th century encouraged renewed interest in written and spoken Hebrew, especially among the Jews of Eastern Europe.
The first Hebrew newspaper, ha-Yom (The Day), appeared in 1886; among several Hebrew periodicals was ha-Shahar (The Dawn), a literary journal founded in Vienna in 1868 and edited by the Russian-born writer Peretz Smolenskin.
It was in this periodical that Smolenskin's great semiautobiographical novel ha-To'eh Be-Darkhei ha-Hayyim (The Wanderer in the Paths of Life, 3 vol., 1868-70) first appeared serially.
The leading poet of the Haskalah was Judah Leib Gordon, born in what is now Lithuania.
His work, composed in biblical and more modern Hebrew, established a new poetic style.
A number of fiction writers, influenced by the Enlightenment movement, turned from Yiddish to Hebrew; one of these was Mendele Mokher Sefarim (pseudonym of Shalom Jacob Abramovich).
The novels of "Grandfather Mendele," concerning contemporary ghetto life, remained widely popular into the 20th century.
Among the most important contributions to the Hebrew renaissance was the work of three Russian-born writers of the same generation, Hayyim Nahman Bialik, Saul Tchernikhovsky, and Zalman Shneur.
Bialik, poet, essayist, and interpreter of the Judaic heritage, was also a translator of European classics such as Don Quixote.
Although much of Tchernikhovsky's poetry celebrates the gods of the ancient world in almost pagan terms, other works are devoted to idyllic portrayals of Jewish folk life.
Shneur's poetry and prose called his people to help in the rebirth of spiritual values.
The settlement of Jews in Palestine gave a new impetus and direction to Hebrew literature, although the first émigr?prose writers were still emotionally tied to the past.
Joseph Hayyim Brenner, a novelist, short-story writer, and literary critic who settled in Palestine in 1908, stressed the tragic element in life and longed for a faith that would offer relief from despair.
The early work of S. Y. Agnon gives a picture of Jewish life in the shtetls, or villages, of Eastern Europe; but from the 1940s on, he wrote of life in the pioneering communities of Palestine.
Hayyim Hazaz went to Palestine in 1931; his work includes stories of the biblical period as well as a novel about Yemenite Jews in the land of Israel, Ha-Yoshevet ba-Gannim (Thou That Dwellest in the Gardens, 1944).
Unlike their prose fiction, the poetry of this first generation of settlers dealt more directly with the new life.
The verse of Rahel Bluwstein, who was born in the Ukraine, proclaims her love of Palestine; most of her work has been set to music.
The poetry of Uri Zvi Greenberg is concerned with topical themes.
Nathan Alterman, born in Warsaw, arrived in Palestine in 1925.
Originally a disciple of French symbolism, he turned from overloaded imagery and dissonant rhymes to simpler language and style in such works as Ir Hayona (The City of the Dove, 1957), and to political themes.
The work of the first native-born Israeli writers continued to show a duality of concerns.
Inspired by the Jewish past, they also wrote of the promise and problems of the new land and of the question of Jewish identity.
Among these writers are Moshe Shamir, novelist and playwright, whose novels include The King of Flesh and Blood (1954; trans. 1958) and My Life with Ishmael (1969; trans. 1970).
From the 1950s on, Israeli literature, like that of Europe and the United States, became more concerned with the individual, with problems of loneliness and alienation.
The highly regarded novelist Amos Oz wrote in My Michael (1968; trans. 1972) of a young housewife's breakdown.
As an aftermath of the Six-Day War in 1967, national themes again became important in Israeli literature.
Thus Oz's later work, such as The Hill of Evil Counsel (1976; trans. 1978), mixes fact and fiction in a story of the revolutionary plotting that led to Israeli independence.
An earlier work, Touch the Water, Touch the Wind (1973; trans. 1974) deals symbolically with the main character's escapes - first from the European Holocaust and then from the 1967 war.
A Perfect Peace (1982; trans. 1985) deals with the clash between two generations of a kibbutz family in the mid-1960s; and Oz's nonfictional work In the Land of Israel (1982; trans. 1983) provides a compassionate, yet objective study of his country.
The work of Aharon Appelfeld, who settled in Israel in 1947, also evokes the Holocaust and his own childhood experiences in Central Europe.
Flight, attempts to hide, and efforts to exorcise the past are themes of his short stories and several novels.
Among the latter, Badenheim 1939 (1980; trans. 1980),  Tzili: The Story of a Life (1982; trans. 1983), and To the Land of the Cattails (1986; trans. 1986) have been widely acclaimed.
Contemporary Israeli poetry has won worldwide acclaim.
Outstanding is the work of Yehuda Amichai, whose collection Amen (1977) was translated by the author and the English poet Ted Hughes.
Selected Poems was published in English translation in 1968, and a bilingual edition of Love Poems was issued in 1981.
His novel Not of This Time, Not of This Place (1963; trans. 1968) is another exploration of Jewish identity.
It is a multilayered account of an Israeli archaeologist who must reconcile his German-Jewish past with present crises, personal and political.
Amichai's short stories were published in English in 1984 under the title The World Is a Room, and Other Stories.
Two other noteworthy poets are Amir Gilboa and T. Carmi.
Gilboa went to Palestine from the Ukraine in 1937.
Using biblical motifs and symbolism, he writes of the destruction of European Jewry - one of his pervasive themes.
Carmi (pseudonym of Carmi Charney) was born in New York City and settled in Israel in 1947.
Colloquial Hebrew phrases are intermingled with biblical quotations in his highly structured and rhythmically controlled poetry.
the written account of an individual life.
(An autobiography is a biography written by the subject.)
The term biography connotes an artful, conscious literary genre that employs a wide range of sources, strategies, and insights; that deals with the intimate, inconsistent textures of personality and experience; and that attempts to render the whole sense of its subject, not the life only but what it was like to have lived it at its several stages.
Ideally, the writer molds complex biographical facts - birth and death, education, ambition, conflict, milieu, work, relationship, accident - into a book that has the independent vitality of any creative work but is, at the same time, "true to life."
Biography is as old as recorded history.
Rulers and magnates of ancient Egypt, Assyria, and Babylonia had their deeds incised in stone and clay.
The Old Testament contains many brief lives of patriarchs and prophets, and the four Gospels of the New Testament can be described as parallel lives of Jesus Christ (see Bible).
Three notable examples of biographical writing in classical times are Memorabilia, a recollection and defense of the Greek philosopher Socrates by Xenophon; Parallel Lives by Plutarch, which the English playwright William Shakespeare used as a source book; and the gossipy and anecdotal Lives of the Caesars by Suetonius.
The practice of commemorating the illustrious dead continues today, in a more objective manner, in multivolume modern compilations such as the Dictionary of American Biography and the British Dictionary of National Biography.
In Western culture until about the middle of the 17th century, biography was generally commemorative; it was meant to be edifying and inspirational, and it dealt didactically with the cautionary lives of malefactors and tyrants as well as with the exemplary lives of heroes and heroines.
Its chief subjects, once Christianity had triumphed, were saints, martyrs, and church fathers, who were depicted less as individuals than as actors in a stylized drama of salvation; the "saint's life" became one of the conventions of medieval literature.
A late work in this hagiographic tradition was Acts and Monuments (popularly known as The Book of Martyrs), originally written in Latin by the English martyrologist John Foxe and published in 1563.
In the same decade appeared the original Italian version of Lives of the Artists by Giorgio Vasari, a work that reflected the new spirit of Renaissance humanism in the fine arts as well as in the interpretation of lives.
An important transitional work is Life of Donne by Izaak Walton, a biography of the English poet John Donne first published in 1640 and, in three successive editions over the next 25 years, revised and developed by its author in the direction of modern biography.
Appropriately, the year of Walton's death, 1683, saw the first recorded use in English - by John Dryden, writing about Plutarch - of the word biography.
The publication in 1791 of The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D. by James Boswell, is generally thought to have established Boswell as the first great modern biographer and to have inaugurated a "golden age of biography" that has extended to the present day.
Yet somewhat the same claim of precedence could be made for Samuel Johnson himself - "The biographical part of literature," he said, "is what I love most" - and his Life of Mr. Richard Savage (1744).
Johnson later wrote The Lives of the English Poets (1779-1781).
During the 19th century, with the publication of such significant works as the Life of Sir Walter Scott (7 volumes, 1837-1838) by John Gibson Lockhart and two biographies of Thomas Carlyle (1882, 1884) by James Anthony Froude, the biographical impetus that sprang from romantic celebrations of the individual contended with and eventually survived social pressures toward reticence and propriety.
At the same time, favored by conditions that later vanished with the advent of the telephone, rapid travel, and electronics, invaluable source materials for biography - personal letters, journals, diaries, and the like - proliferated and were frequently preserved.
In the 20th century the Austrian psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud and other scientific observers of the individual and society provided a further impetus for the exploration of personality through narrative.
Meanwhile, literary standards for the writing of biography continued to rise along with a general level of sophistication.
"A well-written life is almost as rare as a well-spent one," Carlyle said in 1827; the precise sentiment was echoed nearly a century later by Lytton Strachey, author of the popular and influential Eminent Victorians (1918) and Queen Victoria (1921).
Strachey described biography as "the most delicate and humane of all the branches of the art of writing."
Biography retained its broad appeal as various 20th-century literary fashions came and went.
Recent achievements by American biographers include Leon Edel's study of the life and work of the American author Henry James (5 volumes, 1953-1972); Richard Ellmann's 1988 book on the Irish writer Oscar Wilde, which won the 1989 Pulitzer Prize; James Gleick's Genius (1992), about the American physicist and Nobel Prize winner Richard Feynman; and David McCullough's Truman (1992; Pulitzer Prize, 1993), an account of the life of the American president Harry S. Truman.
Data Dictionary, in computer science, a database containing data about all the databases composing a database system.
The content of the data dictionary may best be thought of as "data about the data" - that is, descriptions of all of the other objects (files, programs, and so on) in the system.
In particular, a data dictionary stores all the various schemas and file specifications and their locations.
A complete data dictionary also includes information about which programs use which data and which users are interested in which reports.
The data dictionary is frequently integrated into the system it describes.
(1814-1883), controversial Anglican bishop of Natal, South Africa, who made numerous converts among the Zulu.
Born in Saint Austell, Cornwall, England, Colenso became rector of Forncett Saint Mary's Church, Norfolk, in 1846.
In 1853 he was made bishop of Natal, where he served until his death.
Colenso studied the Zulu language and translated parts of the Anglican prayer book and the Bible into Zulu.
He also prepared a Zulu grammar primer and dictionary.
Although he made many converts among the Zulu, he also adopted some of their beliefs, which led him to question certain Christian tenets and be tried for heresy.
He argued against the historical accuracy of the Pentateuch (the first five books of the Old Testament), opposed the doctrine of eternal punishment for sinners, and condoned polygamy among the Zulu.
In 1863 he was summoned to appear on a charge of heresy before his superior, Bishop Robert Gray of Cape Town, and was convicted in 1864.
Colenso appealed to the judicial committee of the Anglican Church's Privy Council in London and was acquitted on a technicality.
He remained in his post, although the English bishops deposed him in 1869 and a new bishop was appointed alongside him.
In the 1870s Colenso opposed the policies of the Afrikaners (Boers) and Cape officials, who were depriving Zulu of their land and rights.
He pleaded the cause of Zulu chiefs Langalitabele and Cetshwayo, and was regarded by the Zulu as both friend and protector.
He traveled to London to expose a series of atrocities committed by settlers against the Hlubi and Puntini tribes.
The colonial secretary, Lord Carnarvon, agreed with him and fired the lieutenant-governor of Natal, Sir Benjamin Pine.
Colenso opposed the policy of Sir Bartle Frere during the Zulu War (1879), but British expansionist policy in South Africa ultimately triumphed and the Zulu were defeated at the Battle of Ulundi on July 4, 1879. Colenso was a celebrated mathematician and published mathematical textbooks and Village Sermons (1853).
The village and railway station of Colenso, in Natal, are named after him.
geographical dictionary in which political and physical features of the earth, such as countries, cities, rivers, and mountains, are listed alphabetically, and some information, usually descriptive and statistical, is given about them.
The term originally meant anyone who wrote a gazette, or newspaper; it acquired its geographical connotation in the 18th century because of the popularity of The Gazetteer's or Newsman's Interpreter (1703), a geographical dictionary by the English historian Lawrence Echard.
The oldest known work of this type was the Ethnika (probably early 6th century) of the Byzantine geographer Stephanus Byzantinus, parts of which are extant.
One of the first modern gazetteers was La guide des chemins pour aller et venir par tous les pays et contrées du royaume de France (Road Guide to All Districts and Regions of the Kingdom of France, 1552), prepared by the French printer and writer Charles Estienne.
Many gazetteers, for the most part full of serious errors, were compiled during the 17th and 18th centuries.
The 19th century was a great period of development in gazetteers, because of greater knowledge of geography and the need for geographical information in international commerce.
