inhalation and exhalation of the fumes of burning tobacco.
Leaves of the tobacco plant are smoked in various ways.
After a drying and curing process, they may be rolled into cigars or shredded for insertion into smoking pipes.
Cigarettes, the most popular method of smoking, consist of finely shredded tobacco rolled in lightweight paper.
About 50 million people in the United States currently smoke an estimated total of 570 billion cigarettes each year.
As recently as the 1940s, smoking was considered harmless, but laboratory and clinical research has since confirmed that cigarette smoke presents a hazard to health.
Smoke from the average cigarette contains around 4000 chemicals, some of which are highly toxic and at least 43 of which cause cancer.
Nicotine, a major constituent of tobacco smoke, is both poisonous and highly addictive.
According to the American Cancer Society, smoking is the most preventable cause of death in America today.
European explorers who arrived in the western hemisphere in the 1500s observed Native Americans smoking tobacco plant leaves in pipes.
The colonists who followed them grew tobacco plants as a cash crop for export, and smoking became part of European culture by the 1600s.
Most tobacco was consumed in pipes and cigars or as snuff (finely pulverized tobacco inhaled into the nostrils).
Their conclusions were included in the 1964 Surgeon General's report, which stated that "cigarette smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance in the United States to warrant appropriate remedial action."
Smoking in adults, measured as an average number of cigarettes smoked per year, began to decline steadily after the 1964 report, but leveled off in recent years after falling about 40 percent.
The peak of individual cigarette consumption in the United States was reached in 1977, when the average smoker consumed 12,854 cigarettes per year.
The American Cancer Society estimates that cigarettes are responsible for over 400,000 deaths in the United States each year.
Lung cancer accounts for 29 percent of all cancer deaths in the United States and smoking accounts for about 87 percent of lung cancer deaths.
The risks of dying from lung cancer are 23 times higher for male smokers and 11 times higher for female smokers than for nonsmokers.
Additionally, smokers are at increased risk for cancer of the larynx, oral cavity, esophagus, bladder, kidney, and pancreas.
Smoking causes a fivefold increase in the risk of dying from chronic bronchitis and emphysema, and a twofold increase in deaths from diseases of the heart and coronary arteries.
Smoking also increases the risk of stroke by 50 percent - 40 percent among men and 60 percent among women.
Other research has shown that mothers who smoke more frequently give birth to premature or underweight babies, probably because of a decrease in blood flow to the placenta.
The ways in which tobacco smoke affects the human body have been studied intensely.
Recent findings may explain why cigarettes are addictive.
An unknown component of tobacco smoke appears to destroy an important brain enzyme, monoamine oxidase B (MAO B).
The enzyme is vital for breaking down excess amounts of dopamine, a nerve-cell chemical messenger that triggers pleasure-seeking behavior.
Smokers have decreased levels of MAO B and abnormally high levels of dopamine, which may encourage the smoker to seek the pleasure of more tobacco smoke.
Recent research has focused on the effects of environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) - that is, the effect of tobacco smoke on nonsmokers who must share the same environment with a smoker.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates that exposure to ETS, which contains all the toxic agents inhaled by a smoker, causes 3000 cancer deaths per year in nonsmokers and can aggravate asthma, impaired blood circulation, bronchitis, and pneumonia.
A ten-year study published in 1997 concluded that regular exposure to secondhand smoke almost doubled the risk of heart disease.
The smoking habit and addiction to nicotine usually begin at an early age.
In the United States, over 70 percent of adults who smoke began smoking before the age of 18.
However, taking inflation into account, the tax as a percentage of total retail price actually decreased during this period.
Currently, the U.S. tax is approximately 30 percent of retail.
In other developed countries, the cigarette tax rate is much higher, ranging from 50 percent in Switzerland to 85 percent in Denmark.
In the United States, the first direct action to curb smoking after the U.S. Surgeon General's report on smoking in 1964 was the mandate of a warning on cigarette packages by the Federal Trade Commission.
This warning took effect in 1964 and was strengthened in 1969 to read: "Warning: The Surgeon General Has Determined That Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous to Your Health."
A stronger sequence of four alternative warnings was developed in 1984.
In 1971 all cigarette advertising was banned from radio and television, and cities and states passed laws requiring nonsmoking sections in public places and workplaces.
This trend has continued and smoking is now banned at the federal and state levels in most government buildings and in many private businesses.
As of February 1990 federal law banned smoking on all domestic United States airline flights under six hours in duration.
By June of 1996, 80 percent of nonstop flights between the United States and all foreign countries were also smoke free.
Recently, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has attempted to increase its jurisdiction over the marketing and advertising of tobacco products with the aim of reducing smoking, especially among teenage Americans.
The United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has proposed that smoking be banned in all workplaces, although such a law has not yet been passed.
Such efforts have faced strong legal opposition from tobacco companies.
The tobacco industry has been increasingly criticized for its role in encouraging smoking, particularly in young people.
Some tobacco industry representatives deny a direct link between smoking and poor health and that nicotine is addictive.
Various law suits have been brought against tobacco companies to reclaim damages due to disease or death associated with smoking.
The first major successful suit occurred in March 1996 when the Liggett Group, a consortium of companies, agreed to pay damages to five states.
In part to avoid potentially ruinous lawsuits filed by states and diseased smokers, in 1997 the tobacco industry proposed a tentative settlement pledging over $368 billion to be spent over 25 years to compensate states for the costs of treating smoking-related illness, to finance nationwide antismoking programs, and to underwrite health care for uninsured children.
an oily liquid substance found in tobacco leaves that acts as a stimulant and also contributes to smoking addiction.
When extracted from the leaves, nicotine is colorless, but quickly turns brown when exposed to air.
It has an acrid, burning taste.
Nicotine is a very powerful poison, and it forms the base of many insecticides.
Cigarette tobacco contains only a small amount of nicotine and most of this nicotine is destroyed by the heat of burning so that the actual concentration of nicotine in smoke is low.
However, even a small amount of nicotine is sufficient to be addictive.
The amount of nicotine absorbed by the body from inhaling smoke depends on many factors including the type of tobacco, whether the smoke is inhaled, and whether a filter is used.
Tobacco smokers absorb small amounts of nicotine by inhaling smoke from cigars, cigarettes, or pipes.
Nicotine is drawn into the lungs where it enters the bloodstream and is pumped by the heart to the brain.
It takes only seven seconds for nicotine to enter the brain after being inhaled.
Nicotine has various effects on the body.
In small doses nicotine serves as a nerve stimulant, entering the bloodstream and promoting the flow of adrenaline, a stimulating hormone.
It speeds up the heartbeat and may cause it to become irregular.
It also raises the blood pressure and reduces the appetite, and it may cause nausea and vomiting.
The known health risks associated with cigarette smoking, such as damage to the lungs and lung cancer, are thought to be caused by other components of cigarettes such as tars and other by-products of smoking, and by the irritating effects of smoke on the lung tissue.
Addiction to smoking is caused by nicotine itself.
Stopping smoking produces withdrawal symptoms within 24 to 48 hours, which commonly include irritability, headaches, and anxiety, in addition to the strong desire to smoke.
chemical known as a neurotransmitter essential to the functioning of the central nervous system.
In the process of neurotransmission, dopamine is transferred from one nerve cell, or neuron, to another, playing a key role in brain function and human behavior.
Dopamine forms from a precursor molecule called dopa, which is manufactured in the liver from the amino acid tyrosine.
Dopa is then transported by the circulatory system to neurons in the brain, where the conversion to dopamine takes place.
Dopamine is a versatile neurotransmitter.
Among its many functions, it plays a major role in two activities of the central nervous system: one that helps control movement, and a second that is strongly associated with emotion-based behaviors.
The pathway involved in movement control is called the nigrostriatal pathway.
Dopamine is released by neurons that originate from an area of the brain called the substantia nigra and connect to the part of the brain known as the corpora striata, an area known to be important in controlling the musculoskeletal system.
The second brain pathway in which dopamine plays a major role is called the mesocorticolimbic pathway.
Neurons in an area of the brain called the ventral tegmental area transmit dopamine to other neurons connected to various parts of the limbic system, which is responsible for regulating emotion, motivation, behavior, the sense of smell, and various autonomic, or involuntary, functions like heartbeat and breathing.
A growing body of evidence suggests that dopamine is involved in several major brain disorders.
Narcolepsy, a disorder characterized by brief, recurring episodes of sudden, deep sleep, is associated with abnormally high levels of both dopamine and a second neurotransmitter, acetylcholine.
Huntington's chorea, an inherited, fatal illness in which neurons in the base of the brain are progressively destroyed, is also linked to an excess of dopamine.
Commonly known as shaking palsy, Parkinson's disease is another brain disorder in which dopamine is involved.
Besides tremors of the limbs, Parkinson's patients suffer from muscular rigidity, which leads to difficulties in walking, writing, and speaking.
This disorder results from the degeneration and death of neurons in the nigrostriatal pathway, resulting in low levels of dopamine.
The symptoms of Parkinson's disease can be minimized by treatment with a drug called levodopa, or L-dopa, which causes the surviving neurons in the nigrostriatal pathway to increase production of dopamine.
Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder characterized by loss of contact with reality and major changes in personality.
Schizophrenics have normal levels of dopamine in the brain, but because they are highly sensitive to this neurotransmitter, these normal levels of dopamine trigger unusual behaviors.
Drugs such as thorazine that block the action of dopamine have been found to decrease the symptoms of schizophrenia.
Studies indicate that people who are addicted to alcohol and other drugs like cocaine and nicotine have less dopamine in the mesocorticolimbic pathway.
These drugs appear to increase dopamine levels, resulting in the pleasurable feelings associated with the drugs.
any of a group of drugs that excite the central nervous system, increase alertness, and alleviate fatigue.
Caffeine is perhaps the most socially acceptable and commonly used stimulant.
Other stimulants include cocaine and amphetamines, which create intense feelings of euphoria (well-being).
Amphetamines, commonly known as pep pills or diet pills, also decrease appetite.
Stimulants work by mimicking the fight-or-flight response, in which the hormone epinephrine (also known as adrenaline), is released during stressful situations to produce an increased heart rate and increased blood flow to the muscles.
Stimulants produce a similar, but often more powerful, response by increasing levels of the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine in the brain.
Stimulants also appear to act on the limbic system, a group of cell structures in the center of the brain that reward behaviors beneficial to the continuation of the species.
These behaviors - sexual intercourse, eating, and drinking - are normally accompanied by positive sensations, which may primarily result from increased levels of dopamine in the limbic system.
Stimulants produce an even more potent, euphoric sensation by directly increasing dopamine levels in the limbic system.
The appetite-suppressing effect of amphetamines is also thought to derive from the manipulation of this brain reward system: The brain no longer requires food to elevate dopamine levels because the drug has already induced both this elevation and the desired euphoria.
For similar reasons, sex drive is often reduced in heavy users of stimulants like cocaine and amphetamine.
To achieve these potent feelings of well-being, some stimulants are used for recreational purposes - that is, they are used to produce pleasurable effects rather than for medicinal purposes under a physician's supervision.
But the recreational use of stimulants is dangerous because the drugs can both inspire erratic behavior and produce unpleasant withdrawal symptoms.
When the stimulant is eliminated by the body, dopamine levels in the brain fall, producing drug craving, depression, and anxiety.
In some cases prolonged use creates a tolerance for the drug, requiring larger and larger doses to produce a comparable effect.
And in many instances stimulants are highly addictive (see Drug Dependence).
Cocaine and amphetamines produce closely related biological effects that include excitement, alertness, euphoria, a sense of increased energy, and decreased appetite.
Both cocaine and an amphetamine derivative called methamphetamine, commonly known as speed, come in forms that are particularly potent when smoked.
They are also highly addictive.
Cocaine is sometimes used clinically as a local anesthetic, and amphetamines are commonly prescribed to treat hyperactivity in children, and narcolepsy.
Amphetamines were once prescribed as appetite suppressants, but this practice is now discouraged because of negative side effects and the potential for abuse.
Nicotine, a highly addictive stimulant found in tobacco, also directly affects dopamine release in the limbic system.
The drug, which is quickly absorbed into the bloodstream from the lungs when smoked, causes muscle relaxation, increased heart rate, and release of epinephrine.
Withdrawal symptoms include anxiety, anger, restlessness, and insomnia.
The basic mechanisms involved in nicotine addiction are nearly identical to those of cocaine and amphetamine addiction.
Caffeine, found in coffee, tea, cola drinks, and chocolate, is a highly popular stimulant.
In the 1980s and 1990s cigarette manufacturers came under increasing public pressure for the health problems associated with smoking.
Philip Morris, along with other companies, was named as defendant in numerous lawsuits in the 1990s, brought by smokers and their families over smoking-related illnesses and deaths.
A federal circuit court judge ruled in 1997 that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration could regulate tobacco as a drug, and cigarettes as drug-delivering devices.
In 1997 Liggett Group, a cigarette company, supported policymakers' accusations that tobacco companies had added nicotine to their products.
Nicotine is the stimulating and addictive substance in tobacco.
Philip Morris and Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp, one of Philip Morris's main competitors, were the two companies most often cited in this damaging testimony.
Overall, domestic consumption of cigarettes fell in the 1990s.
Nonetheless, Philip Morris increased its profits from cigarettes each year in the mid-1990s by enlarging its share of the U.S. and international markets.
In the mid-1990s the company manufactured more than 220 billion cigarettes a year.
For revenues, profits, and other information about Philip Morris Companies, Inc., see the table with this article.
common name applied to two plants of the nightshade family, that are cultivated for their leaves, which, when cured, are used for smoking and chewing and as snuff.
The most widely cultivated species grows from 1 to 3 m (3 to 10 ft) high and produces 10 to 20 broad leaves that branch alternately from a central stalk.
Tobacco is native to the western hemisphere and was probably first used by the ancient Maya peoples.
They introduced it to Native North Americans, who believed it had medicinal properties and used it in ceremonies.
The Arawak people of the Caribbean, observed by Christopher Columbus in 1492, smoked tobacco through a tube they called a tobago, from which the name originated.
Brought to Spain from Santo Domingo in 1556, tobacco was introduced to France the same year by the French diplomat Jean Nicot, from whom the plant derived its generic name.
In 1585 the English navigator Sir Francis Drake took it to England, and the practice of pipe smoking was introduced among the Elizabethan courtiers by the English explorer Sir Walter Raleigh.
Tobacco use quickly spread throughout Europe and Russia, and by the 17th century it reached China, Japan, and the west coast of Africa.
Although tobacco is cultivated in about 120 climatically diverse countries and as far north as latitude 50? the finer, marketable tobacco products come from only a few select regions and require much care and intensive labor in growing.
Seedlings of special strains - such as those producing Maryland or burley for cigarettes, or filler, binder, and wrapper for cigars - are transplanted from cold frames to fields, each calling for special fertilizer and moisture requirements.
To produce the large, thin leaves for cigar wrappers, great canopies of cheesecloth are erected over fields.
To concentrate growth into the leaves of large-leafed strains, the plant crowns are topped before flowering.
Leaves are frequently hand-harvested in stages as they mature on the plant stem.
The leaves are hung in barns and cured by air, fire, or heat so that each tobacco type wilts, colors, and dries to impart a desired flavor.
Air curing, used for many American cigarette and cigar tobaccos, takes six to eight weeks.
In fire curing, smoke from a fire on the barn floor is allowed to permeate the leaves; in flue curing, heat (which at one time was conducted from fires through flues) is carefully applied so that the leaves ferment and dry correctly.
After curing, the leaves are graded, often according to position on the plant, color, size, and other qualities before being baled and taken to tobacco warehouses for auctioning.
Cigarette consumption, which accounts for most tobacco use in the United States, dropped slightly after 1964, when a special report to the U.S. surgeon general linked cigarette smoking with lung cancer, coronary artery disease, and other ailments.
Since early 1970 the number of cigarettes smoked per capita by American adults has remained virtually unchanged at about 3900 per year.
Whereas tobacco consumption in developed countries is leveling off, in developing countries it is rapidly rising.
In Africa, per capita consumption during the past decade has increased 33 percent.
Developing countries, where the international tobacco industries are now concentrating their efforts, are projected to increase tobacco consumption by 2.8 percent annually.
From 1974 to 1987 U.S. exports in tobacco products and leaf rose in average value from $650 million to $3.4 billion.
The tobacco industry is aided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, through the Commodity Credit Corporation and the price-support system.
Scientific classification: Tobacco plants belong to the family Solanaceae.
They are classified as Nicotiana tabacum (the most widely cultivated) and Nicotiana rustica.
excessive use of addictive substances, especially narcotic drugs and alcohol.
habitual repetition of excessive behavior that a person is unable or unwilling to stop, despite its harmful consequences.
People can be physically addicted to a drug, meaning they may suffer ill physical effects if they stop taking the drug.
They also can be psychologically addicted to drugs, gambling, or other behaviors, meaning they feel overwhelmingly deprived if they attempt to stop.
substance that affects the function of living cells, used in medicine to diagnose, cure, prevent the occurrence of diseases and disorders, and prolong the life of patients with incurable conditions.
Cardiovascular drugs affect the heart and blood vessels and are divided into categories according to function.
Antihypertensive drugs reduce blood pressure by dilating blood vessels and reducing the amount of blood pumped by the heart into the vascular system.
Antiarrhythmic drugs normalize irregular heartbeats and prevent cardiac malfunction and arrest.
Antianemic drugs, such as certain vitamins or iron, enhance the formation of red blood cells.
Anticoagulants like heparin reduce blood-clot formation and ensure free blood flow through major organs in the body.
Thrombolytic drugs dissolve blood clots, which can block blood vessels and deprive the heart or brain of blood and oxygen, possibly leading to heart attack or stroke.
Central nervous system drugs - that is, drugs that affect the spinal cord and the brain - are used to treat several neurological (nervous system) and psychiatric problems.
For instance, antiepileptic drugs reduce the activity of overexcited brain areas and reduce or eliminate seizures.
Antipsychotic drugs are used to regulate certain brain chemicals called neurotransmitters, which do not function properly in people with psychoses, major mental disorders often characterized by extreme behaviors and hallucinations, such as in schizophrenia.
Antipsychotic drugs can often significantly alleviate hallucinations and other abnormal behaviors.
Antidepressant drugs reduce mental depression.
Antimanic drugs reduce excessive mood swings in people with manic-depressive illness, which is characterized by behavioral fluctuations between highs of extreme excitement and activity and lows of lethargy and depression.
Both types of drugs act by normalize chemical activity in the emotional centers of the brain.
Antianxiety drugs, also referred to as tranquilizers, treat anxiety by decreasing the activity in the anxiety centers of the brain.
Sedative-hypnotic drugs are used both as sedatives to reduce anxiety and as hypnotics to induce sleep.
Sedative-hypnotic drugs act by reducing brain-cell activity.
Stimulatory drugs, on the other hand, increase neuronal (nerve cell) activity and reduce fatigue and appetite.
Analgesic drugs reduce pain and are generally categorized as narcotics and non-narcotics.
Narcotic analgesics, also known as opioids, include opium and the natural opium derivatives codeine and morphine; synthetic derivatives of morphine such as heroin; and synthetic drugs such as meperidine and propoxyphene hydrochloride.
Narcotics relieve pain by acting on specific structures, called receptors, located on the nerve cells of the spinal cord or brain.
Non-narcotic analgesics such as aspirin, acetaminophen, and ibuprofen reduce pain by inhibiting the formation of nerve impulses at the site of pain.
Some of these drugs can also reduce fever and inflammation.
General anesthetics, used for surgery or painful procedures, depress brain activity, causing a loss of sensation throughout the body and unconsciousness.
Local anesthetics are directly applied to or injected in a specific area of the body, causing a loss of sensation without unconsciousness; they prevent nerves from transmitting impulses signaling pain (see Anesthesia).
Anticancer drugs eliminate some cancers or reduce rapid growth and spread.
These drugs do not affect all cancers but are specific for cancers in certain tissues or organs such as the bladder, brain, liver, or bones.
Anticancer drugs interfere with specific cancer-cell components.
For example, alkylating agents are cytotoxic (cell-poisoning) drugs that alter the DNA of cancer cells.
Vinca alkaloids, chemicals produced by the periwinkle plant, prevent cancer cell division.
Many other categories of drugs also exist, such as anti-inflammatory, antiallergic, antiParkinson (see Parkinson's Disease), antiworm (see Anthelmintic Drugs), diuretic, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, and muscle-relaxant drugs.
Often a drug in one category can also be used for problems in other categories.
For example, lidocaine can be used as a local anesthetic or as a cardiac drug.
The effect of a drug on the body depends on a number of processes that the drug undergoes as it moves through the body.
All these processes together are known as pharmacokinetics (literally, "motion of the drug").
First in these processes is the administration of the drug after which it must be absorbed into the bloodstream.
From the bloodstream, the drug is distributed throughout the body to various tissues and organs.
As the drug is metabolized, or broken down and used by the body, it goes through chemical changes that produce metabolites, or altered forms of the drug, most of which have no effect on the body.
Finally, the drug and its metabolites are  eliminated from the body.
Depending on the drug and its desired effect, there are a variety of administration methods.
Most drugs are administered orally - that is, through the mouth.
Only drugs that will not be destroyed by the digestive processes of the stomach or intestines can be given orally.
Drugs can also be administered by injection into a vein (intravenously), which assures quick distribution through the bloodstream and a rapid effect; under the skin (subcutaneously) into the tissues, which results in localized action at a particular site as with local anesthetics; or into a muscle (intramuscularly), which enables rapid absorption through the many blood vessels found in muscles.
An intramuscular injection may also be given as a depot preparation, in which the drug is combined with other substances so that it is slowly released into the blood.
Inhaled drugs are designed to act in the nose or lungs.
General anesthetics may be given through inhalation.
Some drugs are administered through drug-filled patches that stick to the skin.
The drug is slowly released from the patch and enters the body through the skin.
Drugs may be administered topically - that is, applied directly to the skin; or rectally - absorbed through an enema (an injection of liquid into the rectum) or a rectal suppository (a pellet of medication that melts when inserted in the rectum).
Absorption is the transfer of a drug from its site of administration to the bloodstream.
Drugs that are inhaled or injected enter the bloodstream more quickly than drugs taken orally.
Oral drugs are absorbed by the stomach or small intestine and then passed through the liver before entering the bloodstream.
Distribution is the transport of a drug from the bloodstream to tissue sites where it will be effective, as well as to sites where the drug may be stored, metabolized, or eliminated from the body.
Once a drug reaches its intended destination, the drug molecules move from blood through cellular barriers to various tissues.
These barriers include the walls of blood vessels, the walls of the intestines, the walls of the kidneys, and the special barrier between the brain and the bloodstream that acts as a filtration system to protect the brain from exposure to potentially harmful substances.
The drug molecules move from an area of high drug concentration - the bloodstream - to an area of low drug concentration - the tissues - until a balance between the two areas is reached.
This process is known as diffusion.
When a drug reaches its highest concentration in the tissues, the body begins to eliminate the drug and its effect on the body begins to diminish.
The time it takes for the level of a drug to fall by 50 percent is known as the drug's half-life.
Depending on the drug, this measurement can vary from a few minutes to hours or even days.
For example, if a drug's highest concentration level in the blood is 1 mg/ml and this level falls to 0.5 mg/ml after five hours, the half-life of the drug is five hours.
A drug's half-life is used to determine frequency of dosage and the amount of drug administered.
Distribution of a drug may be delayed by the binding of the drug to proteins in the blood.
Because the proteins are too large to pass through blood vessel walls, the drug remains in the blood for a longer period until it is eventually released from the proteins.
While this process may increase the amount of time the drug is active in the body, it may decrease the amount of the drug available to the tissues.
While circulating through the body, a drug undergoes chemical changes as it is broken down in a process called metabolism, or biotransformation.
Most of these changes occur in the liver, but they can take place in other tissues as well.
Various enzymes oxidize (add oxygen to), reduce (remove oxygen from), or hydrolyze (add water to) the drug.
Some drugs combine with other drugs to create a substance that has no medical benefit.
In some cases, however, drug interactions can produce desirable results.
Doctors have found that using three drugs to fight AIDS is more effective than one drug used alone.
Drugs are most effective when properly prescribed by physicians and taken correctly by patients.
Missing doses, taking drugs at the wrong time of the day or with instead of before meals, and stopping drug use too soon can markedly reduce the medical benefits of many drugs.
Drug abuse is characterized by taking more than the recommended dose of prescription drugs such barbiturates without medical supervision, or using government-controlled substances such as marijuana, cocaine, heroin, or other illegal substances.
Legal substances, such as alcohol and nicotine, are also abused by many people.
Abuse of drugs and other substances can lead to physical and psychological dependence (see Drug Dependence).
Drug abuse can cause a wide variety of adverse physical reactions.
Long-term drug use may damage the heart, liver, and brain.
Drug abusers may suffer from malnutrition if they habitually forget to eat, cannot afford to buy food, or eat foods lacking the proper vitamins and minerals.
Individuals who abuse injectable drugs risk contracting infections such as hepatitis and HIV from dirty needles or needles shared with other infected abusers.
One of the most dangerous effects of illegal drug use is the potential for overdosing - that is, taking too large or too strong a dose for the body's systems to handle.
A drug overdose may cause an individual to lose consciousness and to breathe inadequately.
Without treatment, an individual may die from a drug overdose.
Drug addiction is marked by a compulsive craving for a substance.
Successful treatment methods vary and include psychological counseling, or psychotherapy, and detoxification programs - medically supervised programs that gradually wean an individual from a drug over a period of days or weeks.
Detoxification and psychotherapy are often used together.
The illegal use of drugs was once considered a problem unique to residents of poor, urban neighborhoods.
Today, however, people from all economic levels, in both cities and suburbs, abuse drugs.
Some people use drugs to relieve stress and to forget about their problems.
Genetic factors may predispose other individuals to drug addiction.
Environmental factors such as peer pressure, especially in young people, and the availability of drugs, also influence people to abuse drugs.
Humans have always experimented with substances derived from minerals, plants, and animal parts to treat pain, illness, and restore health.
In ancient Egypt, physicians prescribed figs, dates, and castor oil as laxatives and used tannic acid to treat burns.
The early Chinese and Greek pharmacies included opium, known for its pain-relieving qualities, while Hindus used the cannabis and henbane plants as anesthetics and the root of the plant Rauwolfia serpentina, which contains reserpine, as a tranquilizer.
A school of pharmacy established in Arabia from 750 to 1258 ad discovered many substances effective against illness, such as burned sponge (which contains iodine) for the treatment of goiters - a noncancerous enlargement of the thyroid gland, visible as a swelling at the front of the neck.
In Europe, the 15th century Swiss physician and chemist Philippus Aureolus Paracelsus identified the characteristics of numerous diseases such as syphilis, a chronic infectious disease usually transmitted in sexual intercourse, and used ingredients such as sulfur and mercury compounds to counter the diseases.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, physicians treated malaria, a disease transmitted by the bite of an infected mosquito, with the bark of the cinchona tree (which contains quinine).
Heart failure was treated with the leaves of the foxglove plant (which contains digitalis); scurvy, a disease caused by vitamin C deficiency, was treated with citrus fruit (which contains vitamin C); and smallpox was prevented using inoculations of cells infected with a similar viral disease known as cowpox.
The therapy developed for smallpox stimulated the body's immune system, which defends against disease-causing agents, to produce cowpox- and smallpox-specific antibodies.
In the 19th century scientists continued to discover new drugs including ether, morphine, and a vaccine for rabies, an infectious, often fatal, viral disease of mammals that attacks the central nervous system and is transmitted by the bite of infected animals.
These substances, however, were limited to those occurring naturally in plants, minerals, and animals.
A growing understanding of chemistry soon changed the way drugs were developed.
Heroin and aspirin, two of the first synthetic drugs created from other elements or compounds using chemical reactions, were produced in the late 1800s.
This development, combined with the establishment of a new discipline called pharmacology, the study of drugs and their actions on the body, signaled the birth of the modern drug industry.
The first drug produced in this manner was the hormone insulin in 1982, which was created in large quantities by inserting the human insulin gene in Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria.
Since 1982 other genetically engineered drugs for humans have been developed, including tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), an enzyme used to dissolve blood clots in people who have suffered heart attacks, and erythropoetin, a hormone used to stimulate the production of red blood cells in people with severe anemia.
Because of the great expense and time involved, most new drugs are created by large, well-funded pharmaceutical companies.
From idea to production, the development of a new drug can take up to ten years and cost about $200 million.
The process usually starts with the idea that an existing chemical substance has therapeutic value or that the structure of an existing drug can be modified for new clinical uses.
