one of the planets in the solar system, it is the fourth planet from the sun and orbits the sun at a distance of about 228 million km (about 141 million mi).
Mars is named for the Roman god of war because it appears fiery red in the earth's night sky.
Mars is a relatively small planet, with about half the diameter of Earth and about one-tenth Earth's mass.
The force of gravity on the surface of Mars is about one-third of that on Earth.
Mars has twice the diameter and twice the surface gravity of Earth's moon.
The surface area of Mars is almost exactly the same as the surface area of the dry land on Earth.
The Martian day, or the time it takes Mars to rotate once on its axis, is about a half an hour longer than an Earth day.
Using HST images, astronomers have determined that the atmosphere of Mars is cooler, clearer, and drier than it was in the mid-1970s, the last time scientists were able to monitor the atmosphere closely.
Scientists believe that Mars's interior consists of a crust, mantle, and core like Earth's interior (see Earth: Composition), but they do not know the relative sizes of these components.
Because no spacecraft has ever brought instruments that can study Mars's interior to the planet, the only real data that scientists have about the planet's structure are its mass, size, and the structure of the gravity field.
From that data scientists can learn some things about density in different parts of the planet.
From studying the earth's magnetic field and core, scientists theorize that the motions of the liquid rock in the earth's core generate its magnetic field.
Mars does not have a significant magnetic field, so scientists believe that Mars's core is probably solid.
Mars does not, and probably did not ever, have active plate tectonics, or a crust made up of separate sections that move about and sometimes crash into each other.
Because Mars is so much smaller than Earth, it cooled quickly after formation and the crust thickened, forming one solid piece and eliminating any possibility of plate tectonics as is seen on Earth.
Though the Martian crust is not broken into separate plates, Mars's liquid mantle has sculpted the planet's surface.
The molten rock has broken through the crust to form volcanoes and its motion has cracked the crust to form large rifts.
The surface of Mars would be a harsh place for humans, but it is more like the surface of Earth than any other planet.
The temperature on Mars does not get much cooler than the temperature at Antarctica.
At the surface it ranges from about -140?C to 15?C (about -225?F to 60?F).
During most of the year wind speeds are fairly low - about 7.0 km/h (about 4.5 mph) - but during dust storms they can approach 70 to 80 km/h (40 to 50 mph).
These winds often originate in large basins in the southern hemisphere and carry large volumes of dust from the basins to other regions, sometimes covering the entire planet in the storm.
The dust is not sandy, as in a sandstorm on the earth, but has the consistency of flour.
The northern and southern hemispheres of Mars have different characteristics.
The southern hemisphere has many impact craters and has a generally much higher elevation than the northern hemisphere.
The southern highlands are probably the oldest terrain on Mars.
The northern hemisphere of Mars contains a much wider variety of geologic features, including large volcanoes, a great rift valley, and a variety of channels.
The northern hemisphere also contains large expanses of relatively featureless plains.
Mars has the largest volcano in the solar system, Olympus Mons.
It is 26 km (16 mi) high (almost twice as high as the earth's Mount Everest) and covers an area comparable to the state of Arizona.
Near it, three other volcanoes almost as large - Arsia Mons, Pavonis Mons, and Ascraeus Mons - form a line running from southwest to northeast.
These four volcanoes are the most noticeable features of a large bulge in the surface of Mars, called Tharsis.
Another volcano, Alba Patera, is also part of the Tharsis bulge, but is quite different in appearance.
It is probably less than 6 km (4 mi) high, but has a diameter of 1600 km (1000 mi).
None of Mars's volcanoes appear to be active.
The Tharsis bulge has had a profound effect on the appearance of the surface of Mars.
The Tharsis bulge includes many smaller volcanoes and stress fractures, in addition to the large volcanoes.
Its presence affects the weather on Mars and may have changed the climate by changing the rotation of the planet.
Valles Marineris (named for the U.S. Mariner spacecraft that discovered it) is the most notable stress feature associated with the Tharsis bulge.
It is a great rift valley extending from the Tharsis region away to the east-southeast.
It is about the same length as the distance from New York to California.
This canyon system reaches widths of 700 km (440 mi) and depths of 7 km (4 mi).
Hellas Planitia is a giant impact basin in the southern hemisphere.
The impact of a large meteorite formed the basin long ago.
With a diameter of about 2000 km (about 1250 mi), it is the largest such basin on Mars.
Three types of channels on Mars may have been formed by the action of water.
These channels are unrelated to the "canals" thought to be seen in early telescopic views of Mars.
Channel networks are similar in appearance to streambeds on the earth and occur in the southern highlands.
These channels may date from a time early in Mars's history when the atmosphere was thicker and liquid water could flow on the surface.Outflow channels, which giant floods may have formed, occur on the boundary between the southern highlands and the northern plains regions.
Ares Vallis, where the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft was scheduled to land, is one of these outflow channels.
Landslides and other erosion probably formed fretted channels by enlarging preexisting channels.
Mars has small, permanent ice caps at its north and south poles.
The caps increase in size in the winter of each hemisphere.
The caps in the north and south are quite different from one another.
The northern permanent cap is composed of water ice and is about 1000 km (about 620 miles) across.
A seasonal cap of frozen carbon dioxide adds to the northern ice cap in the northern winter.
The southern permanent cap is one-third the diameter of the northern cap because summer in the southern hemisphere is warmer than in the north.
The southern seasonal cap is larger than the northern cap - more carbon dioxide is frozen out in the south than the north because Mars is farthest from the sun, and therefore coldest, in the southern winter.
Carbon dioxide may also make up the southern permanent cap.
Regions of striped-looking terrain, probably formed of layers of dust and ice, occur at the edges of both polar caps.
Climate cycles almost like the ice ages on the earth may have caused this layering.
The atmosphere of Mars is 95 percent carbon dioxide, nearly 3 percent nitrogen, and nearly 2 percent argon with tiny amounts of oxygen, carbon monoxide, water vapor, and other gases.
The earth's atmosphere is mostly nitrogen and oxygen, with only 0.03 percent carbon dioxide.
The pressure of Mars's atmosphere varies with the season, ranging from 6 to 10 millibars (1 millibar is approximately one one-thousandth of the air pressure at the surface of Earth).
The variation in pressure is caused by carbon dioxide freezing out at the poles of the planet in fall and winter.
The pressure also varies with altitude and is about a factor of ten less on the top of Olympus Mons than on the floor of Hellas Planitia.
The atmosphere of Mars contains very little water vapor.
The level of water vapor averages about 0.016 percent, compared to the earth's average level of about 2 percent.
The water content of the atmosphere on Mars varies seasonally and by location and can form clouds and even frost.
Six major types of clouds form in Mars's atmosphere.
The polar hood is a haze of water and perhaps carbon dioxide ice that forms over the polar regions in the fall and can cover much of the northern plains.
Wave clouds form on the sheltered side of large obstacles, such as craters, and have very distinct ridges.
The spacecraft Mariner 4, launched in 1963, took the first close-up pictures of Mars.
These pictures had a powerful impact because they only showed impact craters on Mars like those on Earth's moon.
They did not reveal any evidence of the advanced civilizations that people in the 19th century imagined might exist on Mars.
Mariners 6 and 7 took much more detailed pictures of the Martian surface and took measurements of the force of gravity and the atmosphere.
Mariner 9, launched in 1971, revealed the volcanoes, canyons, and channels of Mars, showing that the planet was much more like Earth than like the moon.
NASA launched another series of probes to Mars, Viking 1 and 2, in 1975.
These spacecraft provided scientists with most of the current data about Mars.
Future missions to Mars currently under development include Mars Surveyor 98 Orbiter and Mars Surveyor 98 Lander, a pair of missions to study the climate and history of water and carbon dioxide on Mars.
INTERMARSNET is a program being planned by NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) that will consist of a network of landers to study the surface and interior, complemented by an orbiter.
Long-term plans for the exploration of Mars include a mission that will return samples from the planet and eventually a manned mission.
Humans have looked for signs of life on Mars for over a hundred years.
Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli and others in the middle and late 19th century believed they saw seasonal color changes that indicated a wave of greening in spring.
Some people also believed that they saw canali (Italian for "channels"), or straight lines crisscrossing Mars's surface.
Scientists now know that windblown dust causes the color changes and that the channels are an optical illusion.
Astronomers of the early 20th century saw what they believed were more and more canals (as English-speaking observers termed them) as interest in them grew.
American astronomer Percival Lowell was the most vocal proponent of these canals.
He believed they indicated the existence of an advanced civilization on Mars and wrote several books on the subject in the early 20th century.
He proposed that the canals carried water from the wet polar regions to the dry equatorial deserts.
As telescopes improved, however, astronomers found it more and more difficult to see Lowell's canals.
Images of Mars's surface from the Mariner spacecraft finally proved that the canals did not exist.
Lowell's beliefs about civilization on Mars have had a powerful effect on human perception of the planet.
British author H. G. Wells's The War of the Worlds (1898) and American author Edgar Rice Burroughs's series of Mars books, starting with A Princess of Mars (1912), clearly show the influence of Lowell's ideas.
Some people believe in the existence of a civilization on Mars even today.
The so-called Face on Mars is thought by some people to be evidence of intelligent life on Mars.
This feature, shown in Viking images of the Cydonia region of Mars, looks vaguely like a humanoid face.
Geologists' views of these features are quite different.
The Cydonia region lies near the boundary of the southern highlands and the northern plains and contains a large number of isolated hills, the eroded remnants of the edge of the highland terrain.
These hills resemble the mesas of the U.S. Southwest.
Their resemblance to human faces or pyramids is due to the low resolution and dark areas of missing data in the Viking images and to tricks of light and shadow.
The camera on Mars Global Surveyor 96 was scheduled to take pictures of these features.
One part of the Viking landers' mission was to search for evidence of life.
One instrument was designed to detect organic molecules in the soil.
It found no evidence of organic molecules.
Three biological experiments tested soil samples for evidence of metabolism, growth, or photosynthesis.
None of these experiments showed substantial evidence for the presence of life.
Most scientists today believe that there is no life on Mars.
Conditions there are extremely hostile to life as we know it.
Because of the thin atmosphere, ultraviolet radiation that can destroy living matter reaches the surface.
It is so cold that liquid water cannot exist on the surface during the night.
If life ever had established a foothold on Mars, it would likely have affected the environment there in some way, but no evidence of this exists.
However, it is not impossible that some form of life could exist on Mars today.
Inside pores and cracks in rocks, where there is protection from the extreme conditions of the surface, and where liquid water can exist even at very low temperatures, it is theoretically possible that living organisms could survive.
In August 1996 NASA scientists announced that a meteorite consisting of Martian rock contained possible fossil evidence of bacterialike life.
If confirmed, this discovery would be the first evidence for life outside the earth.
It would increase the likelihood of life elsewhere in the universe, because it would mean that the conditions for the development of life are not specific to Earth.
the sun and the celestial bodies orbiting the sun, including the nine planets and their satellites; the asteroids, comets, and meteoroids; and interplanetary dust and gas.
The term may also refer to a group of celestial bodies orbiting another star.
In this article, solar system refers to the system that includes the earth and the sun.
The dimensions of this system are specified in terms of the mean distance from the earth to the sun, called the astronomical unit (AU).
One AU is 150 million km (about 93 million mi).
The most distant known planet, Pluto, has an orbit at 39.44 AU from the sun.
The boundary between the solar system and interstellar space - called the heliopause - is estimated to occur near 100 AU.
The comets, however, achieve the greatest distance from the sun; they have highly eccentric orbits (see Orbit) ranging out to 50,000 AU or more.
This solar system was the only planetary system known to exist until 1995, when astronomers discovered a planet about 0.6 times the mass of Jupiter orbiting the star 51 Pegasi.
Soon after, astronomers found a planet about 8.1 times the mass of Jupiter orbiting the star 70 Virginis, and a planet about 3.5 times the mass of Jupiter orbiting the star 47 Ursae Majoris.
Many astronomers think it likely that solar systems of some sort are numerous throughout the universe.
See Astronomy; Galaxy; Star.
The sun is a typical star of intermediate size and luminosity.
Sunlight and other radiation are produced by the conversion of hydrogen into helium in the sun's hot, dense interior (see Nuclear Energy).
Although this nuclear fusion is destroying 600 million metric tons of hydrogen each second, the sun is so massive (2 ?1030 kg, or 4.4 ?10 30 lb) that it can continue to shine at its present brightness for 6 billion years.
This stability has allowed life to develop and survive on earth.
For all the sun's steadiness, it is an extremely active star.
On its surface dark sunspots bounded by intense magnetic fields come and go in 11-year cycles; sudden bursts of charged particles from solar flares can cause auroras and disturb radio signals on earth; and a continuous stream of protons, electrons, and ions leaves the sun and moves out through the solar system, spiraling with the sun's rotation.
This solar wind shapes the ion tails of comets and leaves its traces in the lunar soil, samples of which were brought back from the moon's surface by piloted U.S. Apollo spacecraft (see Space Exploration; Apollo Program).
Nine major planets are currently known.
They are commonly divided into two groups: the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) and the outer planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto).
The inner planets are small and are composed primarily of rock and iron.
The outer planets (except Pluto) are much larger and consist mainly of hydrogen, helium, and ice.
Mercury is surprisingly dense, apparently because it has an unusually large iron core.
With only a transient atmosphere, Mercury has a surface that still bears the record of bombardment by asteroidal bodies early in its history.
Venus has a carbon dioxide atmosphere 90 times thicker than that of Earth, causing an efficient greenhouse effect by which the Venusian atmosphere is heated.
The resulting surface temperature is the hottest of any planet - about 477?C (about 890?F).
Earth is the only planet with abundant liquid water and life.
Strong evidence exists that Mars once had water on its surface, but now its carbon dioxide atmosphere is so thin that the planet is dry and cold, with polar caps of solid carbon dioxide, or dry ice.
Jupiter is the largest of the planets.
Its hydrogen and helium atmosphere contains pastel-colored clouds, and its immense magnetosphere, rings, and satellites make it a planetary system unto itself.
Saturn rivals Jupiter, with a much more intricate ring structure and more satellites, including one with an atmosphere - Titan.
Uranus and Neptune are deficient in hydrogen compared with Jupiter and Saturn; Uranus, also ringed, has the distinction of rotating at 98?to the plane of its orbit.
Pluto seems similar to the larger, icy satellites of Jupiter or Saturn.
Pluto is so distant from the sun and so cold that methane freezes on its surface.
The asteroids are small rocky bodies that move in orbits primarily between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.
Numbering in the thousands, asteroids range in size from Ceres, which has a diameter of 1000 km (620 mi), to microscopic grains.
Some asteroids are perturbed, or pulled by forces other than their attraction to the sun, into eccentric orbits that can bring them closer to the sun.
If the orbits of such bodies intersect that of the earth, they are called meteoroids.
When they appear in the night sky as streaks of light, they are known as meteors, and recovered fragments are termed meteorites.
Laboratory studies of meteorites have revealed much information about primitive conditions in our solar system.
The surfaces of Mercury, Mars, and several satellites of the planets (including Earth's moon) show the effects of an intense bombardment by asteroidal objects early in the history of the solar system.
On Earth that record has eroded away, except for a few recently found impact craters.
Some meteors and interplanetary dust may also come from comets, which are basically aggregates of dust and frozen gases about 5 to 10 km (about 3 to 6 mi) in diameter.
Comets orbit the sun at distances so great that they can be perturbed by stars into orbits that bring them into the inner solar system.
As comets approach the sun, they release their dust and gases to form a spectacular coma and tail.
Under the influence of Jupiter's strong gravitational field, comets can sometimes adopt much smaller orbits.
The most famous of these is Halley's comet, which returns to the inner solar system at 75-year periods.
Its most recent return was in 1986.
In July 1994 fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 bombarded Jupiter's dense atmosphere at speeds of about 210,000 km/h (130,000 mph).
Upon impact, the tremendous kinetic energy of the fragments was converted into heat through massive explosions, some resulting in fireballs larger than Earth.
The surfaces of the icy satellites of the outer planets are scarred by impacts from comet nuclei.
Indeed, the asteroidal object Chiron, with an orbit between Saturn and Uranus, may itself be an extremely large inactive comet.
Similarly, some of the asteroids that cross the path of Earth's orbit may be the rocky remains of burned-out comets.
The sun was also found to be encircled by three rings of interplanetary dust.
One of them, between Jupiter and Mars, has long been known as the cause of zodiacal light, a faint glow that appears in the east before dawn and in the west after dusk.
The other two rings, one lying only two solar widths away from the sun, the other occurring in the region of the asteroids, were discovered in 1983.
If one could look down on the solar system from far above the North Pole of Earth, the planets would appear to move around the sun in a counterclockwise direction.
All of the planets except Venus and Uranus rotate on their axes in this same direction.
The entire system is remarkably flat - only Mercury and Pluto have obviously inclined orbits.
Pluto's orbit is so elliptical that it is sometimes closer than Neptune to the sun.
The satellite systems mimic the behavior of their parent planets and move in a counterclockwise direction, but many exceptions are found.
Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune each have one or more satellites that move around the planets in retrograde orbits (clockwise instead of counterclockwise), and several satellite orbits are highly elliptical.
Jupiter, moreover, has trapped two clusters of asteroids (the so-called Trojan asteroids) leading and following the planet by 60?in its orbit around the sun.
(Some satellites of Saturn have done the same with smaller bodies.)
The comets exhibit a roughly spherical distribution of orbits around the sun.
Within this maze of motions, some remarkable patterns exist: Mercury rotates on its axis three times for every two revolutions about the sun; no asteroids exist with periods (intervals of time needed to complete one revolution) 1/2, 1/3, , 1/n (where n is an integer) the period of Jupiter; the three inner Galilean satellites of Jupiter have periods in the ratio 4:2:1.
These and other examples demonstrate the subtle balance of forces that is established in a gravitational system composed of many bodies.
Despite their differences, the members of the solar system probably form a common family.
They seem to have originated at the same time; few indications exist of bodies joining the solar system, captured later from other stars or interstellar space.
Early attempts to explain the origin of this system include the nebular hypothesis of the German philosopher Immanuel Kant and the French astronomer and mathematician Pierre Simon de Laplace, according to which a cloud of gas broke into rings that condensed to form planets.
Doubts about the stability of such rings led some scientists to consider various catastrophic hypotheses, such as a close encounter of the sun with another star.
Such encounters are extremely rare, and the hot, tidally disrupted gases would dissipate rather than condense to form planets.
Current theories connect the formation of the solar system with the formation of the sun itself, about 4.7 billion years ago.
The fragmentation and gravitational collapse of an interstellar cloud of gas and dust, triggered perhaps by nearby supernova explosions, may have led to the formation of a primordial solar nebula (see Nova and Supernova).
The sun would then form in the densest, central region.
It is so hot close to the sun that even silicates, which are relatively dense, have difficulty forming there.
This phenomenon may account for the presence near the sun of a planet such as Mercury, having a relatively small silicate crust and a larger than usual, dense iron core.
(It is easier for iron dust and vapor to coalesce near the central region of a solar nebula than it is for lighter silicates to do so.)
At larger distances from the center of the solar nebula, gases condense into solids such as are found today from Jupiter outward.
Evidence of a possible preformation supernova explosion appears as traces of anomalous isotopes in tiny inclusions in some meteorites.
This association of planet formation with star formation suggests that billions of other stars in our galaxy may also have planets.
The high frequency of binary and multiple stars, as well as the large satellite systems around Jupiter and Saturn, attest to the tendency of collapsing gas clouds to fragment into multibody systems.
See separate articles for most of the celestial bodies mentioned in this article.
See Also Exobiology.
study of the conditions necessary to support the independent development of extraterrestrial life.
Direct proof has not yet been found of life anywhere in the universe other than on the earth, but scientifically sound arguments have been advanced in support of such a possibility.
The findings of modern astronomy suggest that a large number of stars in the universe could have planets orbiting around them that provide conditions suitable for life, and laboratory experiments have demonstrated that many molecules necessary for life can be formed under conditions that may have been present on the earth billions of years ago.
Other planets and moons in the earth's solar system have also come under increased scrutiny as possible habitats for extraterrestrial life.
In a typical laboratory simulation, the presumed primitive atmosphere of the earth is exposed to a source of energy such as an electric discharge or ultraviolet radiation.
The end products of the reactions contain amino acids, carbohydrates, and the bases that are the constituents of nucleic acids.
In some instances, researchers have demonstrated the formation of large molecules through the polymerization of the single components.
They have also inferred the presence of such organic molecules in the early solar system from finding these molecules in meteorites containing carbonaceous material.
Furthermore, radio astronomers have detected several kinds of molecules in interstellar space, including complex organic compounds.
Because some of these molecules may be considered the precursors of life processes, the possibility exists that the chemical reactions leading to life are commonplace in the universe.
In trying to reasonably estimate the distribution of life in the universe, astronomers have developed the formula  N = R*fpnef1f iftL - popularly known as the Drake equation after the 20th-century American astronomer Frank Drake, who conducted the first radio search for extraterrestrial intelligence.
In this formula, N, the number of civilizations capable of communicating across interstellar space, depends on the following:  R*, the mean rate of star formation; fp, the fraction of stars with interplanetary systems; ne, the mean number of planets in each planetary system that are suitable for the origin and evolution of life; f1, the fraction of planets on which life can actually develop; fi, the fraction of life-bearing planets on which intelligent life has evolved; ft, the fraction of planets bearing intelligent life that can give rise to a civilization capable of interstellar communications; and L, the lifetime of a technical civilization.
Of these figures, only R* is well known from astrophysical studies.
Estimates of the other figures are based largely on experience of the single example thus far known - life on earth.
Using this formula, some astronomers suggest that the number of civilizations in the earth's galaxy alone may range from a thousand to a million.
Studies of the planets and other objects of the solar system have suggested that a few other bodies might be capable of harboring life.
In 1996 researchers at the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) announced that they had found structures that might be fossils of tiny, ancient bacteria in a meteorite that originated on Mars.
The structures are about 100 times smaller than the smallest bacteria ever found on the earth, and many scientists have suggested the structures could have been formed by chemical or physical processes instead of living organisms.
In its current state, Mars is not a likely place for life.
It experiences very cold temperatures at night and its thin atmosphere does little to protect the planet from the sun's harmful radiation during the day.
However, eroded channels on Mars's surface suggest that there may have been more water on Mars once.
Water vapor in the atmosphere could have helped insulate and protect the planet and liquid water on the surface could have made Mars a more likely place for life.
NASA's Galileo spacecraft went into orbit around the planet Jupiter in 1995 and has returned many photographs and other information about some of the giant planet's moons.
Of Jupiter's four largest moons, three are candidates for being capable of harboring life.
Studies of the deep, dark oceans of the earth have shown that life can survive and even thrive in areas untouched by sunlight but warmed by heat from the earth's core.
The magnetic fields of Ganymede, Europa, and Io suggest that the moons contain cores of liquid metal, meaning that their interiors might produce enough heat to sustain some form of life.
Galileo images of Europa's surface reveal crumpled sheets of ice that may be floating on a vast ocean of liquid or half-frozen water.
Ganymede is rockier than Europa, but has a stronger magnetic field and may also have some sort of liquid ocean beneath its surface.
Io's interior is probably very active, but it contains less water and water ice than the other two moons.
Life on Io would have to be able to survive in a sulfur-rich environment.
Other bodies in the solar system that could be warmed enough by interior heat to support life are Saturn's moon Titan and Neptune's moon Triton.
Life-harboring planets may also exist beyond the earth's solar system.
Beginning in 1994 several teams of astronomers discovered stars that appear to have planets orbiting them.
Current technology allows astronomers to detect only planets about as large as or larger than Jupiter, but many of the newly-discovered solar systems may also have smaller planets resembling the inner planets of the earth's solar system.
These smaller planets, or satellites of the giant planets, may have the same possibilities of harboring life as bodies in the earth's solar system.
Traveling to other solar systems lies only in the distant future, but scientists have long proposed that radio and other emissions produced by any advanced civilization might prove detectable on the earth's surface.
The first such radio survey of the stars, Project Ozma, was made by Frank Drake at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in 1960.
Since then, many radio-signal surveys of the sky have been completed or are under way.
Perhaps the most ambitious is the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project begun by NASA in 1992.
The project's goal is to examine the radio emissions coming from 1000 nearby stars that resemble the sun.
In 1993, the Congress of the United States cut funding for the project, but private donations have enabled SETI to remain operational.
Currently, no sign of extraterrestrial life has been detected by SETI.
No radiation belts or magnetic field were detected around the planet, indicating that Mars does not have a metallic core.
Mariner 4 monitors also found that the pressure of the planet's carbon dioxide atmosphere is only one-hundredth that of Earth's atmosphere.
The probe relayed 21 photos of meteorite craters on Mars.
By the time that Mariner 5 was launched, on June 14, 1967, the design of the Mariner spacecraft had been slightly modified.
Mariner 5 was somewhat larger and heavier than the earlier probes, weighing about 245 kg (about 540 lb).
The data relayed by Mariner 10 revealed Mercury to be a heavily cratered, sun-baked planet with an iron core similar to that of Earth, a thin hydrogen atmosphere, and a weak magnetic field.
The Mariner program provided much information about the planets of the inner solar system.
The program also provided an opportunity for scientists to learn how to use robotic spacecraft to study planets.
The knowledge gained from the Mariner program was applied directly to the Voyager program, in which two spacecraft were launched in 1977 to explore the gaseous outer planets of the solar system - Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
first space probe to survive landing on the surface of the planet Mars.
Launched by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Viking was the most extensive and complex mission ever to explore Mars and included several experiments designed to test for life on Mars.
The Viking mission used two identical spacecraft to orbit and land on Mars.
NASA launched Viking 1 on August 20, 1975, and Viking 2 on September 9, 1975.
Each Viking spacecraft consisted of an orbiter, carrying a variety of imaging and remote sensing instruments to study Mars from orbit, and a lander, designed to operate on and intensively study the planet's surface.
It took each spacecraft almost a year to reach Mars - Viking 1 went into orbit around Mars on June 19, 1976, and Viking 2 on August 7, 1976. Viking 1 landed on Mars on July 20, 1976, on the western slope of Chryse Planitia.
Viking 2 set down September 3, 1976, at Utopia Planitia, 6460 km (4014 mi) from Viking 1.
The Viking spacecraft continued to function long past their planned 90-day mission.
The Viking 2 orbiter ran out of fuel for its attitude-control system (the system that keeps the craft's solar panels pointed at the sun) and shut down on July 25, 1978; Viking's controllers on the earth were able to keep the Viking 1 orbiter functioning until August 7, 1980.
The last data from the Viking 2 lander were received on the earth on April 11, 1980, and the Viking 1 lander made its final transmission on November 11, 1982.
The Viking orbiters were new versions of the Mariner series of probes that flew by Mars in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
At 2320 kg (5115 lb), they were substantially heavier than the Mariner crafts since each had to carry enough fuel to power engines that would decrease both their speed and the speed of their attached landers when the spacecraft entered the planet's orbit.
The Viking landers owed their heritage to the lunar-landing Surveyor series used in the late 1960s, but they had many significant modifications.
Their three legs were spring-loaded to assure a soft touchdown - the lander's three descent engines were designed to turn off slightly above the planet's surface so as not to unduly contaminate the landing area with fuel exhaust.
The landers were powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs), which use the heat produced by the normal decay of plutonium dioxide to make electrical energy.
Dish-shaped high-gain antennae communicated with the earth, while smaller antennae were used to communicate with the Viking orbiters.
The landers were equipped with a variety of scientific instruments, including meteorology instruments mounted on extendable booms and two cameras mounted on the body of the landers.
Extendable booms and scoops could reach out, dig in the soil, and deliver samples to the miniature analytical laboratories housed on board the lander.
The entire ensemble of each lander folded up to fit neatly inside a heat shield for protection during atmospheric entry.
In turn, the lander and heat shield fit inside a bioshield, which was designed to prevent Earth's microbes from getting inside and possibly contaminating Mars and the sterilized equipment.
The Viking orbiter cameras mapped almost the entire Mars surface to a resolution of only a few hundred meters in addition to scrutinizing potential landing sites for the Viking landers.
The photographic images contain a wealth of detail, showing volcanoes, lava plains, immense canyons, cratered areas, wind-formed features, and evidence that water once flowed on the surface.
These data surpassed the earlier information obtained from Mariner missions and replaced it as the standard.
The Viking orbiters showed Mars to have two main global regions: northern low plains and southern cratered highlands.
Rising above these regions are the volcanic Tharsis and Elysium bulges, and carved into the equatorial terrain is Valles Marineris, a system of giant canyons.
The infrared thermal mappers (heat detectors) and the atmospheric water detectors on the orbiters showed that the northern and southern hemispheres have very different climates.
The scant available water is transported seasonally between the equator and the polar ice caps, and global dust storms originate in the south in summer.
Water vapor is relatively abundant only in the far north during the summer, and permafrost covers much of the planet.
As the landers descended toward the surface, onboard instruments measured the composition and physical properties of the Martian upper atmosphere; the meteorology instruments made the same measurements at the surface.
The element nitrogen, never before detected on Mars, was found in the extremely thin Martian atmosphere, which is composed mostly of carbon dioxide.
The ratios of the isotopes (atoms of the same element but differing in numbers of neutrons) of the elements nitrogen and argon suggested that atmospheric density had been much greater in the distant past.
Atmospheric temperatures ranged from a summer midday at -14?C (5.4?F) to a winter nighttime at -120?C (-196?F).
Barometric pressure varied markedly through the year as carbon dioxide, the major constituent of the atmosphere, froze out to form the immense polar caps at the north and south poles and light covers of frost elsewhere.
The Martian winds were found to blow more slowly than expected, with the highest gusts during dust storms only 119 km/h (74 mph) and average speeds far lower.
The two landers kept their landing sites under nearly continuous surveillance for three Martian years.
The seismometer (a device to detect earthquakes) on the Viking 2 lander detected only one event, suggesting that Mars is geologically quiet.
The sampling equipment measured physical and magnetic properties of the soil, finding it to be an iron-rich clay.
Color images from the landers showed scenes reminiscent of the deserts of the southwestern United States.
An important aspect of the Viking missions was the search for life on Mars.
The landers carried several instruments that had been designed to detect the barest trace evidence of life.
Although the lander instruments found no indication of organic compounds, three biology experiments discovered unexpected and puzzling chemical activity in the Martian soil.
But no clear evidence for the presence of living microorganisms in soil near the landing sites was found.
According to some biologists, Mars soil remains too sterile, due to ultraviolet radiation from the sun and the soil's extreme dryness and oxidizing nature, to sustain life.
Nevertheless, the possibility that life once existed on Mars in the distant past remains open.
