common name applied to fish characterized by an elongate body covered with small, rounded scales and a fleshy fin between the dorsal fin and tail.
These fish belong to the salmon family.
Most members of this family are valuable food fish and excellent game fish.
They are found in both fresh and salt water in the colder regions of the northern hemisphere.
Many return from salt water to freshwater to breed, and the young migrate to salt water from freshwater after they reach maturity.
The migratory instinct of members of the salmon family is remarkably specific, each generation returning to spawn in exactly the same breeding places as the generation before it.
Even those species that do not migrate from freshwater to salt water spawn in the same freshwater streams as did their ancestors.
The spawning ground of these fish is usually a rapidly flowing, clear stream with gravel and rocks on the bottom.
Although usually drab in color before the breeding season, which varies with the species, members of the salmon family develop bright hues at spawning time.
The male, during this season, usually develops a hooked snout and a humped back.
Before mating, one parent excavates a nest for the eggs; after the eggs are deposited and fertilized, the female stirs up the stream bottom so that earth and stones cover the eggs and protect them.
The eggs hatch in two weeks to six months, depending on the species and the water temperature.
During the migrations and nest-building activity that precede mating, neither the females nor the males consume food.
Members of the salmon family subsist on smaller fish, crustaceans, and insects.
In addition to the true salmon, the salmon family also contains many species known as char (see trout); zoologists also include in the salmon family the grayling and whitefish, which are similar in structure.
The true salmon, the largest members of the salmon family, are characterized by tasty flesh that is often orange-red.
The common, market salmon from the North Atlantic Ocean averages about 7 kg (about 15 lb) in weight, but specimens weighing more than 45 kg (more than 100 lb) have been caught.
The Atlantic salmon migrates to cold freshwater in late spring or early summer, swimming upstream at an average rate of up to 6.4 km (4 mi) per day.
Because salmon can jump as much as 3.7 m (12 ft) out of water, they clear most obstacles in their path.
The female lays as many as 20,000 eggs in October or November, after which time the adult salmon float downstream and return to the sea.
Unlike the various species of Pacific salmon (see below), the Atlantic salmon does not die after its first spawning but returns year after year to its breeding place.
The newly hatched young, which are known as parrs or brandlings because of the dark transverse markings on their sides, remain in freshwater for about two years.
At this time, the young, which are known as smolts and have become silvery in color, descend to the sea.
Upon the first return of the Atlantic salmon to its spawning ground, the fish is known as a grilse.
After spawning, it is known as a kelt.
Several subspecies of the Atlantic salmon live in the lakes of the northern United States without ever descending to sea; such salmon are known as landlocked salmon.
Landlocked salmon are much smaller than migrating salmon, attaining a maximum weight of about 16 kg (about 35 lb).
The two most important landlocked populations of the Atlantic salmon are the Sebago salmon, found from New Hampshire to New Brunswick, and the ouananiche, of Lac Saint-Jean, Canada.
Salmon found in the North Pacific Ocean spawn only once, dying after depositing and fertilizing their eggs.
The best-known and most valuable species is the chinook salmon, which is also known as the king salmon, Columbia River salmon, quinnat, chowichee, and takou.
Market specimens of this fish average about 9 kg (about 20 lb) in weight, but numerous specimens more than 1.5 m (5 ft) in length and more than 45 kg (100 lb) in weight have been recorded.
The chinook salmon migrates farther than any other salmon, often traveling 1600 to 3200 km (1000 to 2000 mi) inland to its spawning ground.
Its eggs usually hatch within two months, and the young descend to the sea when they are 5 to 7.5 cm (2 to 3 in) long.
The sockeye, red, or blue-black salmon is another valuable species, as is the coho, or silver salmon, which has light pink flesh.
Other salmon in the Pacific Basin are commonly known as the pink, or humpbacked salmon, and the chum, or dog salmon.
Anglers fish for salmon with rod and reel, usually using flies as bait.
Commercial fishing for salmon is done on a much larger scale, employing traps and pound nets to catch the fish on the way to their spawning grounds.
The salmon fishing industry is one of the major industries of the American Pacific coast, providing 60,000 jobs and more than $1 billion in income per year for the region.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service yearly deposits billions of salmon eggs and young, propagated in nurseries, into natural breeding grounds and constructs fish ladders for the upstream journey of mature salmon.
However, hatchery-raised salmon have aggressive feeding habits - that is, they spend most of their time at the water's surface looking for food, unlike the wild salmon that spend most of their time in deep water or under cover.
As a result, hatchery-raised salmon consume most of the food wild salmon need to live.
At the same time, this aggressive feeding makes hatchery salmon more vulnerable to predators because they stay near the surface.
Hatchery salmon usually have less genetic diversity (see Genetics: Genes in Populations) than wild salmon, which can lead to lowered resistance to disease and other environmental hazards.
The annual harvest of wild and farm-raised salmon in the United States averages about 478,000 metric tons, of which about 60 percent is canned.
Wild Atlantic and Pacific salmon populations are severely threatened.
In particular, the drastic decline of wild Pacific salmon populations has raised alarm and become one of the most important conservation issues in the Pacific Northwest.
Less than 2 percent of the wild salmon population of the Columbia River Basin (including parts of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, and British Columbia) remains and only one individual sockeye salmon returned to the Snake River in Idaho in 1994.
Coho salmon in the Snake River have been declared extinct by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, as have 106 other salmon populations on the West Coast.
The causes of this dramatic decline include the construction of dams, which interfere with both upstream and downstream migration of the fish - 15 to 30 percent of young salmon die at each dam as they migrate down river; loss of spawning habitat due to development; and logging and agriculture near waterways, which lead to erosion, siltation (the clouding of waterways with fine soil), toxic runoff, and high water temperatures, all of which interfere with salmon spawning and migration.
The decline of salmon populations is uniting environmentalists and fishers with industries that extract natural resources, such as hydroelectricity, timber, and water, to find a compromise that saves both the wild salmon populations and the fishing industries that depend on the species' continued health.
Efforts to protect salmon populations in the Pacific Northwest include barging or trucking young salmon around dams; reducing industrial and agricultural water withdrawals from river systems; prohibiting logging near streams or rivers; dramatically limiting salmon fishing seasons; and increasing water flow, or spillage, through hydroelectric dams.
Scientific classification: Salmon belong to the family Salmonidae.
The Atlantic salmon is classified as Salmo salar.
Pacific salmon belong to the genus Oncorhynchus.
The chinook salmon is classified as Oncorhynchus tshawytscha, the sockeye salmon as Oncorhynchus nerka, and the coho salmon as Oncorhynchus kisutch.
common name for many species of fish belonging to the salmon family.
Some, called sea trout, are anadromous - that is, they ascend the rivers from the sea to breed.
Most of the species, however, live exclusively in fresh water and are found in most of the lakes and streams of northern regions.
Their food consists of almost any sort of fresh animal matter, such as smaller fishes, crustacea, and insect larvae.
Trout, like salmon, spawn during the spring or occasionally in the autumn, depending on the latitude and the species.
The most widely distributed species in North America is the common brook trout, or speckled trout, which is similar to the brown trout of Europe.
It is recognized by its large mouth, violet mantle, dark mottlings, and red lateral spots, the general coloring being dark gray or green.
The male has a reddish band running along the side of the body.
Brook trout are found from the Alleghenies in Georgia to the Arctic Ocean, varying in size according to the extent of water and the amount of food they procure, the average weight being about 1 kg (about 2 lb).
The spawning season begins in September and lasts until December, when the female uses her tail to scrape out a hole in the gravel, where she deposits her eggs, the male afterward dropping the milt upon them.
Only about 5 percent of the eggs become fertilized in the natural state; the rest are generally washed out and devoured by other fish.
However, as many as 90 percent can be hatched by artificial means.
The generally more active chars have smaller scales than true trouts and live in the coldest and most secluded waters of North America, Europe, and Eurasia.
The Dolly Varden trout ranges from the Sea of Japan (East Sea) along the coasts of Alaska and Canada to the northwestern United States; it is a highly colored fish that has prominent spots on the body.
It is typically anadromous, but several landlocked populations are known.
The char is not a valued game fish because it does not struggle vigorously when caught.
The largest of all the chars is the Mackinaw trout, or lake trout; it is known in Maine as the togue and in Vermont as the longe.
Specimens weighing 14 kg (30 lb) are often caught and some occasionally scale as much as 57 kg (as much as 125 lb).
The color is gray or black, with lightish spots that sometimes become red.
The fish has a large mouth with strong teeth and is a gluttonous feeder, often descending to deep water.
It is found abundantly in the Great Lakes, Hudson Bay, Alaska, Labrador, New Brunswick, Vermont, and Maine and has been introduced into many other areas of the United States and Canada.
The most important of the trouts is the rainbow trout, native to the lakes and streams of the western United States and introduced widely throughout the world.
Rainbow trout are highly prized as game fish because they fight hard to free themselves, leaping high out of the water.
Steelhead, the anadromous form of the rainbow trout, is also a prized game fish.
Another species, found in the Rocky Mountains region, is the cutthroat trout, known also as mountain trout.
In the southern United States the weakfish and the largemouth black bass are sometimes called trout.
Scientific classification: Trouts belong to the family Salmonidae.
Chars make up the genus Salvelinus, and true trouts the genus Salmo.
The common brook trout is classified as Salvelinus fontinalis, the brown trout of Europe as Salmo trutta, the Dolly Varden trout as Salvelinus malma, and the Mackinaw trout as Salvelinus namaycush.
The rainbow trout is classified as Oncorhynchus mykiss, and the cutthroat trout as  Oncorhynchus clarki.
The weakfish is classified as Cynoscion regalis, and the largemouth black bass as Micropterus salmoides.
elongated, serpentlike fish of the eel order, comprising nearly 600 diverse species.
These species, including the conger eel and moray, are grouped into about 20 families.
They inhabit shallow coastal waters throughout the world.
Most eels have no scales and are protected by a layer of slippery mucus.
Their dorsal and anal fins, which run from close to the head to the often nonexistent tail fin, provide much of the thrust for these lithe swimmers.
Most species are less than 1 m (3 ft) long.
One conger eel, however, is known to grow up to 3 m (9 ft) long and is found as deep as 250 m (820 ft) in the ocean.
Freshwater eels return to the ocean to spawn.
These eels, which are the most important as food and are often sold live in markets, have dense capillary systems close to the skin that can absorb oxygen directly from air or water.
The eels hatch from eggs as leptocephali, which are transparent, very thin, leaflike larvae bearing little resemblance to the adults.
They drift about the ocean surface for as long as three years, feeding on plankton, then metamorphose into round-bodied young eels called elvers, or grass eels, and feed on fish, crabs, and other invertebrates until they reach full size.
The migration and reproduction of freshwater eels remained a mystery until the 20th century, when their spawning beds were discovered in the Sargasso Sea between Bermuda and Puerto Rico.
When the very similar European eel and the American eel reach maturity in freshwater lakes and rivers, they take watercourses, sometimes slithering overland through dewy grass, to reach the ocean, where they swim or drift with currents for as long as a year until they reach the sluggish, weed-filled Sargasso.
Here the eels spawn in deep water, and, before dying, the female produces as many as 20 million free-floating eggs.
The leptocephali drift with the Gulf Stream, taking one year to reach North America and three years to reach Europe.
By this time they have become elvers and accumulate at the mouths of rivers in great masses.
The yellow elvers swim upstream and feed on lake- and river-bottom animals until they become black-and-silver-bodied adults, completing the cycle.
Scientific classification: Eels make up the order Anguilliformes.
Freshwater eels make up the family Anguillidae.
The conger eel is classified as Conger conger, the European eel is classified as Anguilla anguilla, and the American eel is classified as Anguilla rostrata.
common name for any of about 40 species of eel-like, jawless fishes.
Lampreys are widely distributed in freshwater streams and seas of temperate and subarctic regions throughout the world, except for the waters off southern Africa.
In the Middle Ages lampreys were a delicacy, but they are now used mainly for bait.
Lampreys are smooth-skinned, and they attain a length of about 91 cm (about 36 in).
Adult forms of parasitic species live on the blood of fishes and sometimes cause serious depredations in fisheries.
Like the related hagfish, their mouths are circular, without jaws, and equipped with a pistonlike tongue that creates suction when the mouth is placed against an object and the tongue is drawn back.
The inner margin of the mouth and the edges of the tongue are equipped with numerous small, horny teeth with which the lamprey pierces the flesh of fishes.
The adult forms of nonparasitic lampreys do not eat, spawning and dying soon after their metamorphosis into the mature form.
On each side of the body is a row of seven respiratory openings through which the lamprey breathes.
The animal has no bony skeleton whatsoever, its chief support being derived from the cartilaginous notochord.
The sea lamprey is a marine species, native to the Atlantic coast of North America and Europe.
In various areas it has become landlocked and has thus adapted to a life cycle spent entirely in fresh water.
Long known in Lake Ontario, the sea lamprey invaded Lake Erie in the 1920s, where the relative warmth of the water inhibited its reproduction.
The species migrated to Lake Huron in 1939 and then to Lake Michigan.
Within a few years the animal had severely damaged the valuable trout fisheries in these lakes by competing with the fishing industry for the available trout.
Subsequently invading Lake Superior, the lamprey soon became a serious threat to the fishing industry there.
In September 1954, the United States and Canada signed an agreement for joint action against the lamprey.
The most effective methods of control have proved to be the electromechanical weir, which electrocutes the adult lampreys as they head upstream to spawn, and the use of selective chemicals to kill the larvae living in the stream bottom.
All lampreys breed in fresh water, usually in clear streams with gravelly, sandy bottoms.
Marine lampreys ascend freshwater streams like salmon, passing rapids that obstruct their path.
Unlike salmon, they occasionally attach themselves to rocks by their sucking mouths in order to rest or as an aid in moving through swift currents.
Males and females move stones with their mouths and excavate a shallow nest in which the female deposits about 62,500 eggs.
As the eggs are laid, the female stirs up the sand on the bottom of the stream so it rises and adheres to the eggs, weighing them down.
After the spawning, which occurs once in the lifetime of a lamprey, the adult fish wastes away, and dies in two to three months.
The eggs hatch in two to three weeks, and the larvae drift downstream until they settle in a quiet pool, where they burrow in the mud.
The larvae are completely unlike the adult; they are blind and toothless, and have a different feeding mechanism.
A fringe of tiny barbs called barbules surround the mouth, serving as a strainer to capture the small forms of life on which it lives.
The larva is so unlike the adult that scientists formerly believed it to be a member of a special genus, and the name ammocoete is still applied to it.
The ammocoete remains in the mud for at least four years, at the end of which time it undergoes a metamorphosis into the adult form and departs for its adult habitat.
Scientific classification: Lampreys make up the lamprey family, Petromyzontidae, of the order Petromyzontiformes.
The sea lamprey is classified as Petromyzon marinus.
The larva referred to as the ammocoete had previously been classified in the genus Ammocoetes.
