efforts to revise the calendar system to make up for defects in the Gregorian calendar.
Calendar improvements have often been proposed to correct defects in the Gregorian calendar.
Suggestions for official reform of the calendar have all failed, however, probably because people resist changing their traditional economic, religious, and social activities.
Critics of the Gregorian calendar point out that it has 12 months of unequal length; no month is exactly one-twelfth of a year; the number of weeks in the quarter-year and half-year is uneven; and dates and days of the week vary from one year to the next.
One of the best-known proposals for calendar reform is the so-called World Calendar that was considered, but not adopted, in the United Nations in 1954.
This calendar is based on a 52-week, 364-day year starting on Sunday, January 1, with the 365th day, called Year-End Day, intercalated, or added, without date or day of the week.
In leap years an extra Leap-Year Day, also without date or day of the week, is inserted at the end of the 26th week, between the last day of June and the first day of July.
The first month of each quarter has 31 days, and all the others have 30 days.
The chief disadvantage of this calendar is that the Year-End Day interferes with regular religious observances.
The International Fixed Calendar (Thirteen-Month Calendar) is a proposal based on a year divided into 13 months of 28 days each, with the 365th day a Year Day, belonging to no week or month.
In leap years an extra Leap Day is added after June 28. Half-years contain exactly 26 seven-day weeks and quarter-years exactly 13 weeks.
All Sundays occur on the 1st, 8th, 15th, and 22nd of each month.
The additional month, called Sol, is inserted as the seventh month between June and July.
Although this calendar is uniform, it is criticized because national holidays would have to be changed.
A third fixed calendar, the Perpetual Calendar, has been proposed to the U.S. Congress without success.
This calendar, like the World Calendar, has four 3-month quarters and adds an extra Year-End Day and Leap-Year Day.
Monday is the first day of every week, and the quarters all begin on Monday, which is useful for business concerns.
second month of the year.
The name was derived from the Latin word februa, signifying the festivals of purification celebrated in ancient Rome during this month.
It was not originally included in the Roman calendar, which began with March.
According to legend, King Numa Pompilius added the month of January at the beginning of the year and February at its end.
The latter was placed in second position in the Roman calendar in 452 bc.
February was originally 29 days long, but one day was later transferred to the month of August.
It is now 28 days long in ordinary years, a 29th day being added in leap years.
Notable United States holidays celebrated in February include the birthdays of Abraham Lincoln on the 12th and George Washington on the 22nd, which are now celebrated together as Presidents' Day on the third Monday of the month.
system of measuring time for the needs of civil life, by dividing time into days, weeks, months, and years.
Calendar divisions are based on the movements of the earth and the regular appearances of the sun and the moon.
A day is the average time required for one rotation of the earth on its axis.
The measurement of a year is based on one revolution of the earth around the sun and is called a seasonal, tropical, or solar year.
A solar year contains 365 days, 5 hr, 48 min, and 45.5 sec.
A month was originally calculated by ancient peoples as the time between two full moons, or the number of days required for the moon to circle the earth (29.5 days).
This measurement, called a synodic, or lunar month, resulted in a lunar year of 354 days, 11 1/4 days shorter than a solar year.
In modern calendars, however, the number of days in a month is not based on the phases of the moon.
The length of the months is approximately one-twelfth of a year (28 to 31 days) and is adjusted to fit the 12 months into a solar year.
For information concerning the names or arrangement of the months, see the articles on each of the 12 months.
The week was derived from the Judeo-Christian tradition requiring rest from labor every seventh day.
It is not based on a natural phenomenon.
The Romans named the days of the week in honor of the sun, moon, and various planets.
The variations among the many calendars in use from ancient to modern times have been caused by the inaccuracy of the earliest determinations of the duration of the year, together with the fact that a year cannot be divided evenly by any of the other time units: days, weeks, or months.
The earliest calendars based on lunar months eventually failed to agree with the seasons.
A month occasionally had to be intercalated, or added, to reconcile lunar months with the solar year.
A calendar that makes periodic adjustments of this kind is a lunisolar calendar.
The ancient Babylonians had a lunisolar calendar of 12 lunar months of 30 days each, and they added extra months when necessary to keep the calendar in line with the seasons of the year.
The ancient Egyptians were the first to replace the lunar calendar with a calendar based on the solar year.
They measured the solar year as 365 days, divided into 12 months of 30 days each, with 5 extra days at the end.
About 238 bc King Ptolemy III ordered that an extra day be added to every fourth year, similar to the modern leap year.
In ancient Greece a lunisolar calendar was in use, with a year of 354 days.
The Greeks were the first to intercalate extra months into the calendar on a scientific basis, adding months at specific intervals in a cycle of solar years.
The original Roman calendar, introduced about the 7th century bc, had 10 months with 304 days in a year that began with March.
Two more months, January and February, were added later in the 7th century bc, but because the months were only 29 or 30 days long, an extra month had to be intercalated approximately every second year.
The days of the month were designated by the awkward method of counting backward from three dates: the calends, or first of the month; the ides, or middle of the month, falling on the 13th of some months and the 15th of others; and the nones, or 9th day before the ides.
The Roman calendar became hopelessly confused when officials to whom the addition of days and months was entrusted abused their authority to prolong their terms of office or to hasten or delay elections.
In 45 bc Julius Caesar, upon the advice of the Greek astronomer Sosigenes (flourished 1st century bc), decided to use a purely solar calendar.
This calendar, known as the Julian calendar, fixed the normal year at 365 days, and the leap year, every fourth year, at 366 days.
Leap year is so named because the extra day causes any date after February in a leap year to "leap" over one day in the week and to occur two days later in the week than it did in the previous year, rather than just one day later as in a normal year.
The Julian calendar also established the order of the months and the days of the week as they exist in present-day calendars.
In 44 bc Julius Caesar changed the name of the month Quintilis to Julius (July), after himself.
The month Sextilis was renamed Augustus (August) in honor of the Roman emperor Caesar Augustus, who succeeded Julius Caesar.
Some authorities maintain that Augustus established the length of the months we use today.
The Julian year was 11 min and 14 sec longer than the solar year.
This discrepancy accumulated until by 1582 the vernal equinox (see Ecliptic) occurred 10 days early and church holidays did not occur in the appropriate seasons.
To make the vernal equinox occur on March 21, as it had in ad 325, the year of the First Council of Nicaea, Pope Gregory XIII issued a decree dropping 10 days from the calendar.
To prevent further displacement he instituted a calendar, known as the Gregorian calendar, that provided that century years divisible evenly by 400 should be leap years and that all other century years should be common years.
Thus, 1600 was a leap year, but 1700 and 1800 were common years.
The Gregorian calendar, or New Style calendar, was slowly adopted throughout Europe.
It is used today throughout most of the Western world and in parts of Asia.
When the Gregorian calendar was adopted in Great Britain in 1752, another correction of an 11-day discrepancy was made; the day after September 2, 1752, became September 14.
The British also adopted January 1 as the day when a new year begins.
The Soviet Union adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1918, and Greece adopted it in 1923 for civil purposes, but many countries affiliated with the Greek church retain the Julian, or Old Style, calendar for the celebration of church feasts.
The Gregorian calendar is also called the Christian calendar because it uses the birth of Jesus Christ as a starting date.
Dates of the Christian era (see Chronology) are often designated ad (Latin anno domini, "in the year of our Lord") and bc (before Christ).
Although the birth of Christ was originally given as December 25, 1 bc, modern scholars now place it about 4 bc.
Because the Gregorian calendar still entails months of unequal length, so that dates and days of the week vary through time, numerous proposals have been made for a more practical, reformed calendar.
Such proposals include a fixed calendar of 13 equal months and a universal calendar of 4 identical quarterly periods.
Thus far, none has been adopted (see Calendar Reform).
As indicated, the Gregorian calendar is basically a Christian calendar.
The official Christian church calendar is a table containing the holy days, saints' days, and festivals of the church, with the dates of the civil calendar on which they occur.
These include the fixed feasts, such as Christmas, and the movable feasts, which depend on the date of Easter.
The most important early church calendar was compiled by Furius Dionisius Philocalus about 354.
After the Reformation, the German Lutheran church retained the Roman calendar, as did the Church of England and some other Anglican churches.
The calendar of the Protestant Episcopal church retains only those festivals that have a scriptural origin.
The principal seasons of the church calendar observed by most Christians are, in order, Advent, Christmas, Epiphany, Lent, Easter, Ascension, Pentecost, and Trinity.
Several other calendars based on religious doctrine can also be described.
For example, the Jewish calendar, derived from the ancient Hebrew calendar, has remained unchanged since about ad 900.
It is the official calendar of the modern state of Israel and is used by Jewish people throughout the world as a religious calendar.
The starting point of Hebrew chronology is the year 3761 bc, the date for the creation of the world as described in the Old Testament.
The Jewish calendar is lunisolar, based on lunar months of 29 days alternating with 30 days.
An extra month is intercalated every 3 years, based on a cycle of 19 years.
Dates of the Jewish calendar are designated am (Latin anno mundi, "the year of the world") and bce (before the common era).
Another major religious calendar is the Islamic calendar, a lunar one used in most Muslim countries.
It is reckoned from ad 622, the day after the Hegira, or flight of Mohammed from Mecca to Medina.
The Islamic year consists of 12 lunar months.
Thirty years constitute a cycle in which the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 10th, 13th, 16th, 18th, 21st, 24th, 26th, and 29th years are leap years of 355 days; the others are common years of 354 days.
The Islamic date corresponding to a date in the Gregorian calendar can be computed by the following rule, with a maximum error of one day: multiply 970,224 by the Islamic year, divide by 6 decimal places, and add 621.5774.
The figure to the left of the decimal point is the year ad, and the decimal fraction multiplied by 365 is the day of the year.
For information concerning the Aztec calendar and Mayan calendar, see Aztec; Maya.
science dealing with all the celestial bodies in the universe, including the planets and their satellites, comets and meteors, the stars and interstellar matter, the star systems known as galaxies, and clusters of galaxies.
Modern astronomy is divided into several branches: astrometry, the observational study of the positions and motions of these bodies; celestial mechanics, the mathematical study of their motions as explained by the theory of gravitation; astrophysics, the study of their chemical composition and physical condition from spectrum analysis and the laws of physics; and cosmology, the study of the universe as a whole.
Curiosity of ancient peoples concerning day and night and the sun, moon, and stars led eventually to the observation that the heavenly bodies appear to move in a regular manner that is useful in defining time and direction on the earth.
Astronomy grew out of problems originating with the first civilizations - the need to establish with precision the proper times for planting and harvesting crops and for religious celebrations and to find bearings and latitudes on long trading journeys or voyages.
See Archaeoastronomy.
To ancient peoples the sky exhibited many regularities of behavior.
The bright sun, which divided daytime from nighttime, rose every morning from one direction, the east, moved steadily across the sky during the day, and set in a nearly opposite direction, the west.
At night more than 1000 visible stars followed a similar course, appearing to rotate in permanent groupings, called constellations, around a fixed point in the sky, which is known as the north celestial pole.
In the North Temperate Zone, people noticed that daytime and nighttime were unequal in length.
On long days the sun rose north of east and climbed high in the sky at noon; on days with long nights the sun rose south of east and did not climb so high at noon.
Observation of the stars that appear in the west after sunset or in the east before sunrise showed that the relative position of the sun among the stars changes gradually.
The Egyptians may have been the first to discover that the sun moves completely around the sphere of the fixed stars in approximately 365 days and nights.
See Ecliptic.
Further study showed that the sky also holds the moon and five bright planets.
These bodies, together with the sun, move around the star sphere within a narrow belt called the zodiac.
The moon traverses the zodiac quickly, overtaking the sun about once every 29.5 days, the period known as the synodic month.
Star watchers in ancient times attempted to arrange the days and either the months or the years into a consistent time system, or calendar.
Inasmuch as neither an entire month nor an entire year contains an exactly integral number of days, the calendar makers assigned to successive months or years different numbers of days, having a long-range average that would approximate the true value.
Thus, the modern calendar provides for 97 leap years in every 400-year period, so that the average number of days per year is 365.2425, very close to the astronomically determined number, which is 365.24220.
See Calendar.
The sun and moon always traverse the zodiac from west to east.
However, the five bright planets - Mercury, Mars, Venus, Jupiter and Saturn, which also have a generally eastward motion against the background of the stars - move westward, or retrograde, for varying durations during each synodic period.
Thus, the planets appear to pursue an eastward course erratically, with periodic loops in their paths.
In ancient times, people imagined that celestial events, especially the planetary motions, were connected with their own fortunes.
This belief, called astrology, encouraged the development of mathematical schemes for predicting the planetary motions and thus furthered the progress of astronomy during ancient times.
Interesting constellation maps and useful calendars were developed by several ancient peoples, notably the Egyptians, the Mayans, and the Chinese, but the Babylonians accomplished even greater achievements.
To perfect their calendar, they studied the motions of the sun and moon.
It was their custom to designate as the beginning of each month the day after the new moon, when the lunar crescent first appears after sunset.
Originally this day was determined by observations, but later the Babylonians wanted to calculate it in advance.
About 400 bc they realized that the apparent motions of the sun and moon from west to east around the zodiac do not have a constant speed.
These bodies appear to move with increasing speed for half of each revolution to a definite maximum and then to decrease in speed to the former minimum.
The Babylonians attempted to represent this cycle arithmetically by giving the moon, for example, a fixed speed for its motion during half its cycle and a different fixed speed for the other half.
Later they refined the mathematical method by representing the speed of the moon as a factor that increases linearly from the minimum to maximum during half of its revolution and then decreases to the minimum at the end of the cycle.
With these calculations of the lunar and solar motions, Babylonian stargazers could predict the time of the new moon and the day on which the new month would begin.
As a by-product, they knew the daily positions of moon and sun for every day during the month.
In a similar manner the planetary positions were calculated, with both their eastward and retrograde motions represented.
Archaeologists have unearthed hundreds of cuneiform tablets that show these calculations.
A few of these tablets, which originated in the cities of Babylon and Erech (Uruk) on the Euphrates River, bear the name of Naburiannu or Kidinnu, astrologers who may have invented the systems of calculation.
The ancient Greeks made important theoretical contributions to astronomy.
The Odyssey of Homer refers to such constellations as the Great Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades and describes how the stars may serve as a guide in navigation.
The poem Works and Days by Hesiod informs the farmer which constellations rise before dawn at different seasons of the year to indicate the proper times for plowing, sowing, and harvesting.
Scientific contributions are associated with the names of the Greek philosophers Thales of Miletus and Pythagoras of S\E1mos, but none of their own writings survive.
The legend that Thales correctly predicted a total solar eclipse on May 28, 585 bc, is probably apocryphal.
About 450 bc the Greeks began a fruitful study of planetary motions.
Philolaus, a follower of Pythagoras, believed that the earth, sun, moon, and planets all moved around a central fire hidden from view by an interposed counterearth.
According to his theory, the revolution of the earth around the fire every 24 hours accounted for the daily motions of the sun and stars.
About 370 bc the astronomer Eudoxus of Cnidus explained observed motions by the supposition that a huge sphere bearing the stars on its inner surface moved around the earth at its center in a daily rotation.
In addition, to account for solar, lunar, and planetary motions, he assumed that inside the star sphere were many interconnected transparent spheres that revolved in various ways.
Probably the most original ancient observer of the heavens was Aristarchus of S\E1mos, a Greek.
He believed that motions in the sky could be explained by the hypothesis that the earth turns around on its axis once every 24 hours and, along with the other planets, revolves around the sun.
This explanation was rejected by most Greek philosophers, who regarded the big, heavy earth as a motionless globe around which the light, incorporeal bodies revolve.
This theory, known as the geocentric system, remained virtually unchallenged for about 2000 years.
In the 2nd century ad, the Greeks combined their celestial theories with carefully planned observations.
The astronomers Hipparchus and Ptolemy determined the positions of about 1000 bright stars and used this star chart as a background for measuring the planetary motions.
Abandoning the spheres of Eudoxus for a more flexible system of circles, they postulated a series of eccentric circles with the earth near a common center to represent the general eastward motions at varying speeds of the sun, moon, and planets around the zodiac.
To explain the periodic variations in the speed of the sun and moon and the retrogressions of the planets, they postulated that each of these bodies revolved uniformly around a second circle, called an epicycle, the center of which was situated on the first.
By proper choice of the diameters and speeds for the two circular motions ascribed to each body, its observed motion usually could be represented.
In some cases a third circle was required.
This technique was described by Ptolemy in his great work the Almagest (see Ptolemaic System).
Hypatia, a follower of Plato, wrote commentaries on mathematical and astronomical topics and is regarded today as the first female astronomer.
Greek astronomy was transmitted eastward to the Syrians, the Hindus, and the Arabs.
The Arabian astronomers compiled new star catalogs in the 9th and 10th centuries and subsequently developed tables of planetary motion.
Although the Arabs were good observers, they made few useful contributions to astronomical theories.
In the 13th century, Arabic translations of Ptolemy's  Almagest filtered into western Europe, stimulating interest in astronomy.
Initially, Europeans were content to make tables of planetary motions, based on Ptolemy's system, or to write short popular digests of his theory.
Later the German philosopher and mathematician Nicholas of Cusa and the Italian artist and scientist Leonardo da Vinci questioned the basic assumptions of the centrality and immobility of the earth.
The history of astronomy took a dramatic turn in the 16th century as a result of the contributions of the Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus.
He was educated in Italy and was a canon of the Roman Catholic church.
He spent most of his life pursuing astronomy, however, and he made a new star catalog from personal observations.
He is most famous for his great work On the Revolution of Heavenly Bodies (1543), in which he analyzed critically the Ptolemaic theory of an earth-centered universe and showed that the planetary motions can be explained by assuming a central position for the sun rather than for the earth.
Little attention was paid to the Copernican, or heliocentric, system until Galileo discovered evidence to support it.
Long a secret admirer of Copernicus's work, Galileo saw his chance to test the Copernican theory of a moving earth when the telescope was invented in the Netherlands.
In 1609 Galileo made a small refracting telescope, turned it skyward, and discovered the phases of Venus, indicating that this planet revolves around the sun; he also discovered four moons revolving around Jupiter, as well as the rings of Saturn.
Convinced that some bodies, at least, do not circle the earth, he began to speak and write in favor of the Copernican system.
His attempts to publicize the Copernican system caused him to be tried by the ecclesiastical authorities.
Although he was forced to repudiate his beliefs and writings, the powerful theory could not be suppressed.
From the scientific viewpoint, the Copernican theory was only a rearrangement of the planetary orbits, as conceived by Ptolemy.
The ancient Greek theory of planets moving around circles at fixed speeds was retained in the Copernican system.
From 1580 to 1597 the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe observed the sun, moon, and planets at his island observatory near Copenhagen and later in Germany.
