state in the United States, classified as one of the west south central states.
The term is appropriate, for west, south, and Midwest states seem to meet in Arkansas.
The southwestern section of the state, with its cattle and oil fields, has the feeling of the Western Plains.
Dairy farms and orchards in the northwest seem more akin to parts of the Corn Belt, while the cotton plantations in the east toward the Mississippi River are reminiscent of the Deep South.
Arkansas's natural resources are abundant water; vast forests of quick-growing pines and valuable hardwoods; and extensive deposits of oil, natural gas, bauxite, and many other minerals.
Arkansas entered the Union on June 15, 1836, as the 25th state.
Until the 1950s Arkansas was primarily an agricultural state.
Farming was the chief source of income, but a meager source for many, particularly in the uplands, and many people left Arkansas in search of a better livelihood.
Then, Arkansas, aided by coordinated planning and new developments in transportation and power production, began to industrialize very rapidly.
By the end of the 1950s manufacturing had surpassed farming as the chief source of income, and in the 1990s Arkansas had an economy dominated by the manufacturing and service sectors.
Tourism has also become important.
The diversified and fairly well-balanced economy is reflected in the state's official nickname as The Land of Opportunity.
Arkansas is also called The Natural State by tourism promoters.
The name Arkansas is taken from the Arkansas River, which is named for the Native Americans of the Arkansa tribe.
The s was added as a plural, though it remains silent in the pronunciation formally adopted by the state's legislature.
Little Rock is the capital and largest city of Arkansas.
Arkansas ranks 28th among the states in size, and it covers 137,741 sq km (53,182 sq mi), including 2867 sq km (1107 sq mi) of inland water.
Its maximum extent north to south is 386 km (240 mi), and east to west 444 km (276 mi).
The mean elevation is about 200 m (about 650 ft).
Arkansas has two well-defined natural regions.
A line drawn from the northeastern corner of the state southwestward through Little Rock to Arkadelphia, and from there due west to the Oklahoma border, separates the two regions.
North and west of the line are the Interior Highlands; east and south of the line is the Coastal Plain.
The Interior Highlands include the Ozark Mountains, the Ouachita Mountains, and the Arkansas River Valley, which divides the two highland regions.
The highest mountain peak in the state, Magazine Mountain, rises abruptly from the Arkansas Valley floor to 839 m (2753 ft) above sea level.
Other isolated peaks in the valley are Sugar Loaf Mountain, Poteau Mountain, Mount Nebo, and Petit Jean Mountain.
North of the Arkansas Valley are the Ozark Mountains, or Ozark Plateaus, which lie mainly in southern Missouri.
Commonly known as the Ozarks, they are made up of ancient sandstones and limestones.
In many places the limestone has been dissolved by water to form caves, sinks (depressions or holes in the earth's surface), and even underground river channels.
The southern part of the Ozarks is known as the Boston Mountains, which extend about 300 km (about 200 mi) from east to west.
They form the most rugged part of the Ozarks and are bounded on the north by a gentle escarpment.
With peaks more than 700 m (2300 ft) high, the Boston Mountains are a heavily wooded tangle of steep sandstone ridges and jagged spurs, cut through by gorges as much as 430 m (1400 ft) deep.
South of the Arkansas Valley are the Ouachita Mountains, which also contain rocks of great age.
The rock layers here were subjected to tremendous pressure in the geologic past and were pushed into folds that now form long, narrow ridges that run from east to west and are separated by wide basins.
The Ouachitas cover a belt about 80 to 100 km (about 50 to 60 mi) wide extending from just west of Little Rock into Oklahoma.
They rise to the west, reaching over 800 m (2600 ft) at Blue Mountain near the Oklahoma state line.
The Coastal Plain in Arkansas extends across the eastern and southern parts of the state in two sections.
The easternmost section is composed of the fertile Mississippi Alluvial Plain.
This is often called the Delta, and until it was cleared for agriculture it was an area of swamps, dense forest, and tangled undergrowth.
Its flat expanse is broken only by a narrow strip of hills, called Crowley's Ridge, which extends about 240 km (about 150 mi) from Helena on the Mississippi River north to the Missouri border where it reaches a height of about 170 m (about 550 ft).
West of the southern part of the Delta is the West Gulf Coastal Plain, drained by the Saline, Ouachita, and Red rivers.
Abundance of water is a distinctive feature of Arkansas.
The entire state drains southeastward to the Mississippi River, which forms the eastern boundary of Arkansas.
There the Mississippi flows and winds its way across a wide floodplain.
The Arkansas River is a major tributary of the Mississippi River.
It rises as a small stream in the Rocky Mountains, and by the time it reaches Arkansas it is a great river flowing between broad banks.
The water level on the river fluctuates seasonally.
Other major rivers of the state are the Red River, which forms part of the boundary with Texas; the Ouachita River and its tributary, the Saline, which drain south-central Arkansas; the White River and its tributaries, the Black and the Little Red, which gather the runoff of northern Arkansas; and the Saint Francis River, in the northeast, which flows almost parallel to the Mississippi before joining it near Helena.
There are no large natural lakes in Arkansas.
The largest bodies of water are reservoirs behind dams.
Among the larger of these lakes are Beaver and Greers Ferry reservoirs, Bull Shoals Lake, and Lake Norfolk, all of which are located on the White River or its tributaries; Ozark Reservoir and Dardanelle and Nimrod lakes, all on the Arkansas River or its tributaries; Lake Ouachita, on the Ouachita River, Lake DeGray, on the Caddo River; and Millwood Reservoir, on the Little River, which is a tributary of the Red River.
Except in the Ozark and Ouachita uplands, where temperatures vary considerably from ridge to valley, the climate throughout Arkansas is fairly uniform.
Summers are long and moderately hot, and winters are short and relatively mild.
However, northward and westward from the Coastal Plain, there is a gradual change from warm winters and hot, humid summers to the clearer, brisker, drier weather and wider range of temperatures associated with the Interior Plains.
January temperatures in most of Arkansas average between 3?and 8?C (38?and 46?F).
July averages are between 26?and 28?C (78?and 82?F) throughout most of the state.
They are usually in the middle 20°s C (upper 70°s F) in the Ozark and Ouachita uplands.
Daytime highs in July are frequently in the middle 30°s C (90°s F) and sometimes the temperature rises to the upper 30°s C (lower 100°s F).
Arkansas receives about 1000 to 1300 mm (about 40 to 50 in) of precipitation a year, and some areas receive even more.
Most of the rain comes during winter and spring and at times is so heavy as to cause flooding.
Snow is rare in the south but amounts to more than 250 mm (10 in) a year in the mountains.
Arkansas has a long growing season.
It averages 211 days for the state as a whole and ranges from 241 days in the lowlands to 176 days in the mountains.
The last killing frost of winter is usually over by mid-March in the south and southeast and by late April in the northwest.
In the fall the first killing frost arrives by mid-October in the Ozarks, but it may not be felt at Little Rock until early November.
Arkansas has five major types of soil.
The flatlands of the Mississippi Alluvial Plain have dark soils, rich in organic material.
This soil, derived mainly from silt brought down by the Mississippi River from the northern prairies, is very fertile and supports cotton, soybeans, and rice crops.
Fine silt and wind-deposited loess (yellowish-brown loam) are found on Crowley's Ridge.
The well-drained, rolling land of the ridge is good orchard country and also supports corn crops and pasturelands.
Sandy soils and clays characterize much of the Coastal Plain, which is heavily forested with pine trees.
The soils of the Ozarks are derived mainly from limestone, while those of the Ouachitas are derived from shale and sandstone.
Both of these upland areas have suffered soil erosion, and both Crowley's Ridge and the Gulf Coastal Plains have even more severe soil erosion problems.
However, cattle, poultry, hay, and small grains are still raised.
About one-half of the state is covered with trees, and timber is one of Arkansas's most valuable resources.
Dogwood can be found in most parts of the state, and the pecan tree is widely planted for its shade.
Although the bottomlands of the Mississippi Alluvial Plain have been almost completely cleared for cotton, soybeans, and rice, reforestation is encouraged and ongoing.
Cypress and water tupelo grow in the swamps and bayous.
Water oak, hickory, ash, and holly occur on the better-drained low ridges.
Higher still, on Crowley's Ridge grows the stately tulip poplar, more usually found in the Appalachians, as well as oak, hickory, basswood, and the cucumber tree.
Oak and hickory forests also characterize the Ozark region, where white, red, blackjack, and post are true species typical of the oak.
These forests also contain black walnut, American elm, and white ash.
South of the Arkansas River the oak-hickory forest merges into pine forest, chiefly loblolly and short-leaf pines.
The pines grow very rapidly, providing a continuous supply of wood.
Some 2470 native plants and many exotics, or plants brought from other areas, flourish in Arkansas.
The passionflower and water lily, as well as 36 varieties of orchid, grow throughout the state.
The American bellflower, blue lobelia, verbena, phlox, yellow jasmine, hibiscus, aster, and wild hydrangea brighten the forested areas.
In the spring, dogwood, redbud, crab apple, wild plum, locust, and many other flowering trees burst into bloom.
The bobcat, opossum, muskrat, weasel, rabbit, and squirrel are very common.
Red and gray foxes can be found; deer and elk thrive in state and federal game refuges.
Black bear reintroduced from Minnesota are thriving in Arkansas's highlands areas.
The Mississippi River and the lower valleys of its tributaries lie on one of the great flyways for birds migrating between the Gulf of Mexico and Canada.
When southward migration begins in the fall, millions of ducks, geese, and other waterfowl are on the move, and many of them find rich feeding grounds in the rice-growing country around Stuttgart.
The rice fields also attract many other game birds, among them woodcocks, teal, and quail.
Quail are also found in brush patches all over the state, and, through protection, the wild turkey is increasing in numbers in upland and lowland areas.
The level country is the habitat of several species of warblers, the painted bunting, and the mockingbird, the state bird.
Herons wade in lowland streams, and the Mississippi kite, Bachman's sparrow, blue grosbeak, and chuck-will's-widow occur in the Delta country of the Mississippi-Arkansas-White river floodplain.
In mountain areas the whippoorwill, Eastern phoebe, American goldfinch, and brown thrasher are common.
The Ozarks-Ouachita region is also the breeding ground for such species as the scarlet tanager, ovenbird, summer tanager, Carolina wren, rufous-sided towhee, and roadrunner.
The poisonous snakes in Arkansas are the cottonmouth water moccasin, copperhead, coral snake, and three species of rattlesnake.
Non-poisonous snakes include the speckled king snake, black snake, blue racer, and garter snake.
Turtles, frogs, lizards, and salamanders are plentiful, and a few alligators are found in the swamplands of south central Arkansas.
The rivers, streams, and lakes of the state in general support a wide variety of fish, including largemouth and spotted bass, catfish, and several species of bream.
Mountain waters contain smallmouth bass and the colorful darter.
The broad, slow rivers of the Delta teem with crappie, sturgeon, buffalo fish, and pickerel.
Striped bass have been introduced to many reservoirs, and trout populations are found below dams in the White River system.
Norfolk National Fish Hatchery is the largest trout hatchery in the country.
Each year about 2 million recently hatched fish, called fingerlings, are introduced into many Ozark waters, including the White, Spring, and Little Red rivers.
The White River and its tributaries also provide good habitat for freshwater mussels.
Soil erosion is widespread in Arkansas.
The most widely eroded areas are Crowley's Ridge and the Gulf Coastal Plain.
In 1937 Arkansas was the first state to pass legislation to organize voluntary soil conservation districts.
President Theodore Roosevelt took an active interest in conserving the state's timber resources, and he set aside the Ouachita National Forest in 1907 and the Ozark National Forest in 1908.
The Arkansas Industrial Development Commission was established in 1955 to bring new industries into the state, expand existing ones, and provide technical assistance in locating factories.
Within five years Arkansas had achieved extensive industrialization.
About 1,297,000 people held jobs in Arkansas in the early 1990s.
The largest share of those, about 23 percent, worked in the diverse services sector, which includes such occupations as health care workers and automobile mechanics.
About 21 percent were employed in wholesale or retail trade; 20 percent in manufacturing; 14 percent in federal, state, or local government, including those in the military; 6 percent in farming (including agricultural services), forestry, or fishing; 5 percent in transportation or public utilities; 5 percent in construction; 5 percent in finance, insurance, or real estate; and less than 1 percent in mining.
In the mid-1990s about 8 percent of the state's workers were members of a labor union.
Farms in Arkansas range from tiny cultivated patches in the narrow valley bottoms and on the steep slopes of the Ozark-Ouachita uplands to prosperous commercial farms in the Arkansas River valley and large commercial farms in the Mississippi bottomlands.
Agriculture produced less than 4 percent of the gross state product.
In the mid-1990s there were 44,000 farms in Arkansas with annual sales of $1000 or more.
More than one-half of them had annual sales of less than $10,000. Farmland occupied 6.2 million hectares (15.4 million acres), of which about one-half was cropland.
Many of those working on Arkansas farms are farm operators or members of their families, who do not work for wages.
Although its agriculture is becoming more and more diversified, Arkansas remains one of the leading cotton-producing states.
Cotton was introduced into Arkansas about 1800, and was first grown by homesteaders.
Later, when steamboat transportation opened up the fertile bottomlands, landowners arrived from other cotton-growing states to cultivate large plantations with slave labor.
In the 1930s the cultivation of soybeans was encouraged by the Soil Conservation Service as a means of replenishing the fertility of soils impoverished by the growing of cotton.
Farmers began to appreciate its advantages as a cash crop well suited to mechanization, and in the 1950s there was a huge increase in soybean acreage.
By the mid-1970s, Arkansas ranked as the nation's leading rice-producing state, a rank it still holds.
Other important crops are wheat, sorghum grain, and hay (including lespedeza, alfalfa, clover, and wild hay) and similar plants used for livestock feed.
Tomatoes, peaches, apples, grapes, strawberries, pecans, snap beans, sweet potatoes, watermelons, and spinach are also grown.
Crops of winter wheat are increasingly grown in the Mississippi Plain.
Livestock raising and dairying, conducted mainly in the northwestern and northern sections of the state and in the lower Arkansas River valley, have become important in Arkansas since the 1920s.
The quality of cattle has been greatly improved, and ranchers have shown great interest in the Santa Gertrudis, a sturdy breed developed in Texas and well suited to Arkansas's hot summers.
Poultry farms are found throughout western Arkansas on marginal land in the highlands.
Arkansas ranks first among the states in production of broilers and is also a leading producer of turkeys and eggs.
The forests of the Mississippi Alluvial Plain contain considerable oak forests along with cypress, water tupelo, black and sweet gum.
South of the Arkansas River in the Ouachitas and the Gulf Coastal Plain, the vast coniferous forests of loblolly and shortleaf pine supply saw mills.
In the Ozarks, oak and hickory forests once formed the basis of a thriving woodworking industry.
While the oak and hickory forests remain, the woodworking industry has diminished.
These plants are located in the small- to medium-sized towns in the Ozarks, along the Arkansas River valley, and in western Arkansas.
However, many new plants, making such items as electronics equipment, air conditioners, shoes, and light metal goods, have been established in the state.
The federal government has developed hydroelectric power in the Arkansas, White, and Ouachita river basins.
During the prehistoric period, successive waves of human culture spread over Arkansas.
Nomadic hunter-gatherers, whose culture is called Paleo-Indians by archaeologists, were present about 10,500 to 12,000 years ago.
Divided into small bands, they ranged widely over the area, hunting many now-extinct animals.
Next was the Dalton era, which started about 10,500 years ago and lasted about 1000 years.
The Dalton-era Sloan site in northeast Arkansas ranks as one of the oldest prehistoric cemeteries in the United States.
The Dalton period saw the introduction of improved stone tools, notably the adze, a woodworking tool.
In the Archaic period, 9500 to 3000 years ago, woven baskets and highly specialized stone tools abounded.
The people of the Woodland era, beginning about 3000 years ago, practiced horticulture and mound building, and made clay pottery.
The mound complex in Toltec State Park on the Arkansas River was erected during this era.
These mounds were apparently used for ceremonies.
Large burial mounds were a prominent feature of the final prehistoric culture, the Mississippian, which began about 700 ad.
The Mississippians used bows and arrows, conducted organized warfare, and erected cities that depended on an agriculture of corn and beans.
The first European to witness the Mississippian culture was the ill-fated Spanish explorer Hernando de Soto in 1541.
Landing his army in Florida in 1539, de Soto explored the area of the southeastern United States, searching for mineral treasure.
After crossing the Mississippi in 1541, the expedition explored Arkansas for gold and silver.
Finding none, they turned back, and de Soto died in 1542.
Some archaeologists and historians believe he died in Arkansas.
His soldiers furtively sank his body in a river in fear that the local people would desecrate it if they found it.
He had made enemies all along his route by his attempts to dominate the residents and confiscate food and supplies from them.
The expedition left in 1543, and only a pitiful remnant survived to return to their starting point in Mexico.
The expedition was also a disaster for the Native Americans because the Spanish brought European diseases to which they had no immunity.
A severe population decline soon occurred, almost certainly caused by the spread of these diseases.
The central Mississippi Valley was almost empty of people by the time the French arrived in 1673.
The Spanish did not return after 1543. France, however, was interested in exploring the Mississippi as a route for trade.
In 1673 a French party of seven explorers, led by Father Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet, came down the river from the north.
At the southern end of their journey they visited the four villages of a people now called the Quapaw, who lived where the Arkansas River flows into the Mississippi.
One of their villages had a name recorded as Arkansea, which the French called Arkansas.
That name was given to the river, the region, and later the state.
The Quapaw spoke a language of the Siouan group, and most of the languages in that group were spoken near the Great Lakes or the Atlantic coast.
Thus historians and archaeologists are divided as to whether the Quapaw were a remnant of the Mississippian culture or had recently come to the area.
Tempted by the prospect of a trading empire on the Mississippi, French explorer Ren?Robert Cavelier, sieur de La Salle, continued where Marquette left off.
From Arkansas he followed the Mississippi to its mouth in the Gulf of Mexico in 1682.
On the basis of this exploration he claimed all the land drained by the Mississippi for France, naming it Louisiane (in English, Louisiana).
La Salle granted land in Arkansas to his trusted lieutenant Henri de Tonty, who in 1686 founded a trading station at Poste des Arkansas (Arkansas Post), near the Quapaw villages.
This was the first French settlement west of the Mississippi and in the lower Mississippi Valley.
Besides the Quapaw, the French encountered other Native American peoples.
The most powerful were the Osage, a Siouan-speaking tribe who lived in Missouri but sought to exclude the Quapaw and others from hunting in western Arkansas.
Osage dominance limited the growth of the little colony at Arkansas Post.
On the Red River lived the Caddo, who were probably descended from the peoples encountered by de Soto.
They were weakened by disease and about 1805 were driven out of the state into Texas by Osage aggression.
Another small tribe, the Taensa, had been pushed into the present-day state of Louisiana by 1673.
In 1717 a Scottish financier named John Law, director of a French bank, evolved an elaborate plan to populate Louisiana with white settlers and exploit the wealth of the Mississippi Valley.
He sent white colonists and black slaves to Arkansas Post and planned to establish a duchy there for himself.
The project, which came to be known as the Mississippi Bubble, collapsed in 1720 because Law issued thousands of shares of overpriced stock to finance it.
Most of the colonists abandoned Arkansas Post and camped on the lower Mississippi above the new city of New Orleans.
Later, the colonists at Arkansas Post supplied bear oil, tallow, buffalo meat, skins, and furs to the New Orleans market.
Other settlements arose at the mouth of the White River in 1766; at Hopefield, opposite the future site of Memphis, in 1797; and at Helena, also in 1797.
When white rice is desired, the bran is removed in special machines; care is taken not to break the white internal kernel.
The rice kernels are then polished with glucose and talc in order to enhance their appearance.
In the late 1960s, experiments by the International Rice Research Institute produced a variety of rice that promised to increase world output dramatically.
Working with dwarf varieties of rice from Taiwan and with disease-resistant, high-yield varieties from other areas in Asia, researchers developed a short, vigorous, narrow-leaved rice that yielded more grain and survived unfavorable weather more successfully than traditional varieties.
The new rice was a nonlodging rice; it did not bend over when ripe and was thus more easily harvested, did not rot because of immersion, and was less subject to rodent damage.
Development and testing of new strains and new cultivating procedures continue in an effort to increase world yield.
The most serious diseases of rice are seedling blight, leaf and leaf-sheath spots, leaf smut, stem rot, kernel spots, and straighthead.
Seedling blight is an infection of seedlings, caused by any of four fungi.
Blast, a form of leaf spot caused by a fungus, is one of the most serious rice diseases of Asia and also affects American rice-growing areas.
Leaf smut, also caused by a fungus, attacks rice in Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas.
Stem rot, caused by either of two fungi, attacks the stalks of rice, causing them to break; stem rot is common throughout the American rice-growing area.
Several fungi produce discoloration, or spotting of rice kernels.
Straighthead is the most important nonfungal disease of the American rice.
This condition, which is characterized by the failure of seemingly healthy plants to develop seeds, is caused by insufficient preparation of the soil.
Only a few American insects are considered serious pests on growing rice.
The annual world rice harvest in the early 1990s exceeded 510 million metric tons, an increase of about 30 percent over the average during the period from 1979 to 1981.
The leading rice producers were China, with 36 percent of world output, and India, with 22 percent.
In the United States, production averaged close to 7 million metric tons; Arkansas, California, Louisiana, and Texas were the leading rice-producing states.
Scientific classification: Rice makes up the genus Oryza, of the family Gramineae.
Common rice is classified as Oryza sativa.
He graduated from the University of Arkansas College of Pharmacy in Little Rock in 1965.
He then managed his family's farm in Gillett, Arkansas, raising rice, soybeans, corn, and wheat.
Berry entered politics in 1978 when he was elected to the Gillett City Council.
In 1982 Bill Clinton hired Berry to manage his Arkansas County campaign for governor.
Berry also served in that position during Clinton's 1986 and 1990 campaigns for governor.
In 1986 Governor Clinton appointed Berry to the Arkansas Soil and Water Conservation Committee.
When Clinton became president in 1992, Berry served as his adviser to the United States Agriculture Department.
He also served on the White House Domestic Policy Council.
In 1996 Berry was elected to the U.S. House from the First Congressional District of Arkansas.
The First District encompasses the eastern third of the state, including the Mississippi River Delta.
Corporate farming and heavy industry make up the economic base.
Nucor-Yamato Steel Company is a major employer.
In 1997 Berry served on the Agriculture Committee.
